Title:
Electrochemical characterization and redox behavior of Nb-doped SrTiO

Abstract:
Sr-vacancy compensated Nb-doped SrTiO3 with the nominal composition Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3 has been evaluated as a solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC) anode material in terms of redox stability and electrochemical properties. Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3 has been synthesized with a recently developed modified glycine–nitrate process. The phase purity and redox behavior have been analyzed with XRD and TGA. The electrochemical properties of Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3 and a composite electrode of Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ have been investigated by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) on cone shaped electrodes and on electrodes in a symmetrical cell configuration. The experiments indicated that the Nb-doped SrTiO3 electrodes were redox stable and showed a potential ability to be used as a part of a SOFC anode. The electrochemical activity appeared to be governed by the concentration of defect species (especially Ti3+ and VO •• ) in the vicinity of the triple phase boundaries. However, the electrocatalytic activity of the materials was not sufficient and it needs to be improved if Nb-doped SrTiO3 based materials are to be realized as SOFC anodes.

Keywords:
Nb-doped SrTiO3
Ceramic anode
SOFC
Redox stability

Acknowledgements:
The authors would like to acknowledge financial support of the European Union IP-project Real-SOFC (SES6-CT-2003-502612). We are grateful to the Fuel Cells and Solid State Chemistry Department at Risø for assistance.

Introduction:
Solid oxide fuel cells (SOFC) are high temperature electrochemical devices, which convert the energy of a chemical reaction directly into electrical energy. They are normally operated between 600–1000 °C. Yttria-doped zirconia (YSZ), a polycrystalline ceramic that conducts oxide ions, is used as electrolyte and a nickel-YSZ cermet is the most frequently used anode material in the current state-of-the-art SOFC. The nickel-based fuel electrode can convert simple gases, e.g. hydrogen and CO, without problems. However, nickel tends to agglomerate and sinter, resulting in a degradation of the anode performance with time. The Ni–YSZ anode degrades during redox cycles [1] and impurities in the fuel stream, particularly sulphur [2], inhibit anode functionality.
A new anode must satisfy several important requirements. It should be thermodynamically stable in the anode compartment, electrocatalytically active, and have both electronic and ionic conductivity. The anode must also be chemically inert in contact with the electrolyte and interconnect materials and posses a thermal expansion coefficient similar to that of other SOFC components.
Several authors have suggested that anodes based on a perovskite structure are promising candidates for future fuel cell anodes [3–5]. Recently composites with doped strontium titanates have been reported to show promising electrocatalytic and conductivity results appropriate for SOFC applications [6]. The doped strontium titanate composite anodes were tolerant to oxygen-, carbon, and sulphur-containing atmospheres. Other research groups have reported that titanate-based anodes were remarkably active for the oxidation of CH4 at high temperatures in the absence of excess steam [7]. Some n-doped titanates have also been found to be dimensionally phase stable during redox cyclings [8] and highly tolerant to extremely high sulfur-containing (up to 1% H2S) fuel atmospheres [9]. Thermodynamic calculations and experiments indicated that SrTiO3 was thermodynamically stable in 10% H2S/3% H2O/87% H2. The titanate did not react with the sulfur even after 5 days exposure at 950 °C [10].
The performance of the SrTiO3-based anodes depends on the thermal history and calcination (sintering) atmosphere during the synthesis of the materials [8,11–13]. In this study, a recently developed synthesis route [14] based on the glycine nitrate combustion process (GNP) [15], was used for fabricating submicron sized particles of Nb-doped strontium titanate. The Nb-doped strontium titanate material has been evaluated as part of a potential anode material in terms of electrochemical properties with special focus on redox stability. The defect and electrical transport properties have been investigated in detail elsewhere [16] and will be used as a basis for some of the discussion.

Experimental:
2.1 Sample preparation and characterization Vacancy-compensated Nb-doped strontium titanate with extra A-site deficiency (nominal composition=Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3) was synthesized by a modified glycine nitrate combustion process (GNP). A detailed description of the synthesis is published elsewhere [14]. The powder ash that formed after the synthesis was calcined in air or in 9% H2/N2 at 800–1100 °C for 2–3 h. Samples with nominal composition Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3 were pressed into cylinders (first uniaxially dry pressed with 125 MPa followed by isostatically pressed with 325 MPa) for electrochemical characterization using cone shaped electrodes. The pressed samples were subsequently sintered in reducing atmosphere (9% H2/N2) for 12 h at 1400 °C. Reducing atmosphere during sintering was used to try to ensure electronic compensation in the material. The partial pressure of oxygen (P(O2)) during sintering was monitored with an external YSZ oxygen sensor set at 1000 °C. The P(O2) in the furnace at 1400 °C was approximately 10−17 atm. Samples with approximately 95% apparent density (determined by Archimedes principle) were obtained by this process. The sintered samples were mechanically prepared into cone shaped electrodes. The base of the cones had a diameter of 7.5 mm with the cone mantle making an angle of 45° with the base. The phase identification of the powders and sintered samples was carried out using an X-ray diffractometer (STOE Theta-Theta diffractometer). X-ray diffractograms were collected at 20°≤2θ ≤90° using Cu Kα radiation (40 kV and 30 mA). The redox behavior of the powder was investigated with thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) (Netzsch STA 409C/CD) at an isothermal temperature of 850 °C (10 °C/min ramp rate). The samples, which had been calcined in 9% H2 in N2 at 1100 °C for 2 h (P(O2)≈10−18 atm at 1100 °C), were first heated in flowing (50 ml/min) 9% H2 in N2 to 850 °C. When a stable weight value was reached the gas was switched to flowing air (50 ml/min) and the weight increase was used to calculate the concentration of Ti3+ defect species in the titanate. The calculations are based on the defect chemistry model for donor doped strontium titanate, in which the donor compensation mechanism shifts from the cation vacancy to the electronic type when the materials are reduced (see reaction [4] in Section 4.1). The [Ti3+] (mol Ti3+/mol nominal Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3) was calculated as: (1) [ Ti 3 + ]=2 ⋅ m O,TG ⋅ M sample M O ⋅ m sample where m O,TG is the weight increase of the material as it is oxidized (it is assumed that only oxygen is absorbed), M O is the molar weight of oxygen (O), m sample the mass of the sample after water desorption, and M sample is the molar weight of nominal Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3.
2.2 Electrochemical characterization The electrochemical properties of Nb-doped SrTiO3 (Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3) was investigated using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and potential sweeps on cone shaped electrodes using the same setup as described elsewhere [17]. Measurements were conducted between 650–1000 °C in various atmospheres with dry or water-saturated H2/N2 gas mixtures. The electrochemical measurements were obtained with a Gamry FAS2 Femtostat (frequency range 60 kHz–50 mHz with 25 mV amplitude). The electrode polarization resistance of Nb-doped SrTiO3 (Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3) has also been characterized by EIS with a symmetrical cell configuration. A full ceramic composite electrode containing Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3 powder and a commercial YSZ powder (Tosoh, TZ8Y), 1:1 by weight (approximately 54/46 vol.% ratio), has also been investigated. TZ8Y was used to prepare a presintered YSZ electrolyte, ca: 200 μm thick. The electrode material was suspended in a slurry and applied onto both surfaces of the presintered YSZ electrolyte substrate by spraying. The cells were subsequently sintered in air or in reducing atmosphere (9% H2/N2) at 1250 °C for 2–3 h. The thickness of the electrode layers was between 15–30 μm after sintering. Before EIS measurements, Pt-paste was applied onto the electrodes to obtain a current collection layer. For the samples where the electrodes were sintered in a reducing atmosphere the applied current collection layer was also calcined in a reducing atmosphere to avoid oxidation of the electrode. Measurements were conducted between 650–1000 °C in various atmospheres with water-saturated (at ambient temperature) H2/N2 gas mixtures. The various symmetrical cell samples were also subjected to numerous redox cycles in order to investigate the redox stability of the materials and to simulate the effect of loss of hydrogen fuel during SOFC operation. One redox cycle involved changing the atmosphere from reducing (wet H2) to completely oxidizing (wet air) at 850 °C. The oxidizing atmosphere was maintained for 0.5–2.5 h and then the gas was switched back to wet H2 again. The impedance response was monitored as a function of time from re-reduction as well as a function of the number of redox cycles. The P(O2) was monitored in-situ during the measurements to ensure that the atmosphere was completely changed from reducing to oxidizing and back to reducing again. Three complete redox cycles were performed for the symmetrical cells with Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3 electrodes while 19 cycles were conducted for symmetrical cells with the composite electrode (Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/TZ8Y). The impedance spectra of the electrochemical cells were obtained at open circuit potential (OCP) with a Solartron 1260 FRA (frequency range 1 MHz–50 mHz with 25 mV amplitude).

Sample Preparation And Characterization:
Vacancy-compensated Nb-doped strontium titanate with extra A-site deficiency (nominal composition=Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3) was synthesized by a modified glycine nitrate combustion process (GNP). A detailed description of the synthesis is published elsewhere [14]. The powder ash that formed after the synthesis was calcined in air or in 9% H2/N2 at 800–1100 °C for 2–3 h.
Samples with nominal composition Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3 were pressed into cylinders (first uniaxially dry pressed with 125 MPa followed by isostatically pressed with 325 MPa) for electrochemical characterization using cone shaped electrodes. The pressed samples were subsequently sintered in reducing atmosphere (9% H2/N2) for 12 h at 1400 °C. Reducing atmosphere during sintering was used to try to ensure electronic compensation in the material. The partial pressure of oxygen (P(O2)) during sintering was monitored with an external YSZ oxygen sensor set at 1000 °C. The P(O2) in the furnace at 1400 °C was approximately 10−17 atm. Samples with approximately 95% apparent density (determined by Archimedes principle) were obtained by this process.
The sintered samples were mechanically prepared into cone shaped electrodes. The base of the cones had a diameter of 7.5 mm with the cone mantle making an angle of 45° with the base.
The phase identification of the powders and sintered samples was carried out using an X-ray diffractometer (STOE Theta-Theta diffractometer). X-ray diffractograms were collected at 20°≤2θ ≤90° using Cu Kα radiation (40 kV and 30 mA).
The redox behavior of the powder was investigated with thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) (Netzsch STA 409C/CD) at an isothermal temperature of 850 °C (10 °C/min ramp rate). The samples, which had been calcined in 9% H2 in N2 at 1100 °C for 2 h (P(O2)≈10−18 atm at 1100 °C), were first heated in flowing (50 ml/min) 9% H2 in N2 to 850 °C. When a stable weight value was reached the gas was switched to flowing air (50 ml/min) and the weight increase was used to calculate the concentration of Ti3+ defect species in the titanate. The calculations are based on the defect chemistry model for donor doped strontium titanate, in which the donor compensation mechanism shifts from the cation vacancy to the electronic type when the materials are reduced (see reaction [4] in Section 4.1). The [Ti3+] (mol Ti3+/mol nominal Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3) was calculated as: (1) [ Ti 3 + ]=2 ⋅ m O,TG ⋅ M sample M O ⋅ m sample where m O,TG is the weight increase of the material as it is oxidized (it is assumed that only oxygen is absorbed), M O is the molar weight of oxygen (O), m sample the mass of the sample after water desorption, and M sample is the molar weight of nominal Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3.

Electrochemical Characterization:
The electrochemical properties of Nb-doped SrTiO3 (Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3) was investigated using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and potential sweeps on cone shaped electrodes using the same setup as described elsewhere [17]. Measurements were conducted between 650–1000 °C in various atmospheres with dry or water-saturated H2/N2 gas mixtures. The electrochemical measurements were obtained with a Gamry FAS2 Femtostat (frequency range 60 kHz–50 mHz with 25 mV amplitude).
The electrode polarization resistance of Nb-doped SrTiO3 (Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3) has also been characterized by EIS with a symmetrical cell configuration. A full ceramic composite electrode containing Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3 powder and a commercial YSZ powder (Tosoh, TZ8Y), 1:1 by weight (approximately 54/46 vol.% ratio), has also been investigated. TZ8Y was used to prepare a presintered YSZ electrolyte, ca: 200 μm thick. The electrode material was suspended in a slurry and applied onto both surfaces of the presintered YSZ electrolyte substrate by spraying. The cells were subsequently sintered in air or in reducing atmosphere (9% H2/N2) at 1250 °C for 2–3 h. The thickness of the electrode layers was between 15–30 μm after sintering. Before EIS measurements, Pt-paste was applied onto the electrodes to obtain a current collection layer. For the samples where the electrodes were sintered in a reducing atmosphere the applied current collection layer was also calcined in a reducing atmosphere to avoid oxidation of the electrode. Measurements were conducted between 650–1000 °C in various atmospheres with water-saturated (at ambient temperature) H2/N2 gas mixtures.
The various symmetrical cell samples were also subjected to numerous redox cycles in order to investigate the redox stability of the materials and to simulate the effect of loss of hydrogen fuel during SOFC operation. One redox cycle involved changing the atmosphere from reducing (wet H2) to completely oxidizing (wet air) at 850 °C. The oxidizing atmosphere was maintained for 0.5–2.5 h and then the gas was switched back to wet H2 again. The impedance response was monitored as a function of time from re-reduction as well as a function of the number of redox cycles. The P(O2) was monitored in-situ during the measurements to ensure that the atmosphere was completely changed from reducing to oxidizing and back to reducing again. Three complete redox cycles were performed for the symmetrical cells with Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3 electrodes while 19 cycles were conducted for symmetrical cells with the composite electrode (Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/TZ8Y). The impedance spectra of the electrochemical cells were obtained at open circuit potential (OCP) with a Solartron 1260 FRA (frequency range 1 MHz–50 mHz with 25 mV amplitude).

Results:
3.1 Structural characterization and redox behavior From the XRD investigation, the Nb-doped SrTiO3 (Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3) showed a cubic perovskite type structure after calcination both in air and in reducing atmosphere (P(O2)≈10−18 atm at 1100 °C), see Fig. 1 . The isothermal redox behavior of Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3, calcined in reducing atmosphere at 1100 °C for 2 h and redox cycled twice at 850 °C is shown in Fig. 2 . Switching the gas from reducing atmosphere to air had an immediate effect on the P(O2) while in the opposite direction there was a delay before the P(O2) started to drop. This is probably explained by the difference in concentration between H2 (9% H2 in N2) and oxygen (21% O2 in air) in the different reduction and oxidation gases. It was also clear that the sample did not return to the same reduced state (seen as a lower [Ti3+]) after the redox cycles, at least not during the time intervals used in the experiment.
3.2 Electrochemical characterization and redox stability 3.2.1 Cone measurements Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy measurements were performed both at open circuit potential (OCP) and under polarization. The impedance spectra results from measurements under OCP and under cathodic polarization is shown in Fig. 3 . The contact area between the cone and the electrolyte was calculated by using Newman's formula [18]: (2) r=1 4 ⋅ σ ⋅ R S where r is the radius of the contact area, σ is the specific conductivity of the electrolyte material and RS is the resistance determined from the high frequency offset. The procedure for determining the contact area, and some problems associated with this method, is described elsewhere [17]. The specific conductivity of the electrolyte (in S/cm) was extracted from the paper by Appel et. al. [19]. At −300 mV (cathodic) overpotential (η) the polarization resistance was more than one order of magnitude smaller than at OCP while at η=+200 mV (anodic overpotential) the polarization resistance (RP ) was about a factor of two higher than at OCP. The cone measurement results indicate that Nb-doped SrTiO3 has a better performance in cathodic current direction compared to anodic. The spectra in Fig. 3 consisted of at least two overlapping semicircles and the same model was used to fit all spectra measured in the given temperature range and for all the gas compositions. The model used to fit the impedance data is shown in Fig. 3 as well. In this model R S relates to the ohmic drop in the electrolyte. Q 1 and R 1 are presumably related to the double layer capacitance and charge (ion) transfer impedance at the interface between the cone electrode and the electrolyte. Q 2 and R 2 are assumed to be related to the electrochemical kinetics of the electrode material [17]. RP is simply the sum of R 1 and R 2. Measurements at different temperatures and with various gas compositions were performed in order to try to elucidate the different electrochemical and physical processes that are responsible for the impedance response in Fig. 3. The activation energies (measurements between 650–1000 °C) for the resistive parts in the equivalent circuit model are shown in Table 1 together with the P(O2), P(H2) and P(H2O) dependence at 850 °C. The activation energies were found in the Arrhenius plots by multiplying the constant k in the linear regression shown in Eq. (3) with the gas constant. (3) ln ( 1 / R n )=k ⋅ ( 1 / T ) n=S, 1, or 2. The P(O2), P(H2), and P(H2O) dependence were found by the constant m in the linear regression shown in Eq. (4). (4) log ( 1 / R n )=m ⋅ log ( P ( X ) ) n=S, 1, or 2 and X=H2, O2, or H2O. Eq. (4) is a simple way of empirically evaluating the effect of the partial pressure of various reactant gases. It should be noted that there is no theoretical consideration behind selecting this equation. The activation energy for 1/R S was the same as reported for similar YSZ materials in the literature [19]. The activation energies of 1/R 1 and 1/R 2 indicate that these parameters are highly dependent on the temperature as well. The P(O2) variation (at constant P(H2O)) was conducted by changing the amount of N2 in the gas stream before the water saturation flask and thereby changing the P(H2)/P(H2O) ratio, and by this the P(O2). The P(H2O) was constant at approximately 0.037 atm while the P(H2) was changed between 0.0089–0.963 atm. The measurements were thus simultaneously performed at three different oxygen partial pressures, P(O2)=1.1·10−20–2.1·10−16 atm (measured with an oxygen sensor). In the constant P(O2) measurements, the P(H2) was varied by changing the amount of dry N2 in the gas stream and only letting H2 pass the water saturation flask, which kept the P(H2)/P(H2O) ratio constant, and hence a constant P(O2). The measurements were performed at three different hydrogen partial pressures, P(H2)=0.0963–0.963 atm. The P(H2O) was consequently simultaneously changed as well between 0.0037–0.037 atm. It is clear from Table 1 that both 1/R 1 and 1/R 2 were affected by a change in P(O2) (at constant P(H2O)) while 1/R S seemed to be virtually independent of the oxygen partial pressure. Only 1/R 2 was affected by the simultaneous change in P(H2) and P(H2O) (at constant P(O2)). 1/R S and 1/R 1 seemed to be rather independent of P(H2) and P(H2O) (at constant P(O2)). The slopes only deviated slightly from zero. Potential sweeps were also performed on the Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3 cone electrode. The results are shown in Fig. 4 . The features in the Fig. 4 are different depending on which direction the measurements started (cathodic or anodic current direction first). The material seems to perform better in cathodic current direction than in anodic current direction. A steep slope in Fig. 4, at a certain overpotential, indicate better performance. Similar results were shown in Fig. 3, where the polarization resistance was lower in cathodic current direction (splitting of water, electrolysis mode) than in anodic current direction (oxidation of hydrogen, fuel cell mode). 3.2.2 Symmetrical cell measurements Some impedance spectra from symmetrical cell measurements on porous electrodes at 850 °C in hydrogen humidified with water (97% H2/3% H2O) are shown in Fig. 5 . All spectra have been fitted with the same equivalent circuit containing a Gerischer impedance element, LRS(Q 1 R 1)G(Q 2 R 2). The circuit description code used here is described elsewhere [20]. The Gerischer impedance can be represented by a quite simple impedance relation [21]: (5) Z ( ω )=Z 0 D ⋅ ( k + j ω ) where k represents a reaction rate and D is a diffusion constant. It is clear from Fig. 5 that the composite with Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ (S94TNb10/YSZ) had an initial performance that was one order of magnitude better than the sample without YSZ. This indicates that the titanate has a very low ionic conductivity (σe >> σi ) and that YSZ improves the electrode performance by providing conduction of oxygen ions. The results from the redox cycles of the composite sample (Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ) are shown in Fig. 6 . Each measuring point was taken 13 h after the gas was switched back to wet H2 again. The polarization resistance increased from the initial value of 16.3 Ωcm2 to 29 Ωcm2 after two redox cycles, but from the second to the 19th redox cycle RP only increased by 12%. How the different parameters evolved over time after re-reduction during a redox cycle is shown in Fig. 7 where the sixth redox cycle is presented in more detail. R S and R 1 decreased slightly with time during the first seven hours, while R 2 and R G increased with time and were stable after 13 h. Similar behavior was seen for all redox cycles. The main components of RP appeared to be R 2 and R G (the real part of the Gerischer impedance when ω →0, RG=Z 0 / D · k), while R 1 appeared to be small (between 0.34–0.37 Ωcm2, see Fig. 6) and relatively constant with redox cycles. R S increased from an initial value of 0.47 Ωcm2 to 0.56 Ωcm2 after the 19th redox cycle (Fig. 6). However, R S and R1 decreased with time during re-reduction (see single redox cycle in Fig. 7). For the single component electrode symmetrical cells with Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3 (S94TNb10) the polarization resistance (R P ) decreased from an initial value of 163 Ωcm2 to 96 Ωcm2 after the third redox cycle. Samples that had been fabricated in air were reduced in-situ in wet H2 at 980 °C. The redox cycles were then performed at 850 °C. After the redox experiments, a more detailed analysis was performed for the symmetrical cells having the composite material (Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ) as the electrodes. The activation energies (measurements at four temperatures between 750–925 °C) for the different parts in the equivalent circuit model are shown in Table 2 together with the P(O2) and P(H2) dependence at 925 °C (at constant P(H2O)). The activation energies and the P(O2) and P(H2) dependence were extracted similarly as in the cone measurements previously explained (see Eqs. (3) and (4)). The activation energies indicate that all parameters are highly temperature dependent. The variation in P(O2) was conducted at 850 °C by changing the amount of N2 in the gas before the water saturation flask and thereby changing the P(H2)/P(H2O) ratio. The P(H2O) was constant at approximately 0.03 atm while the P(H2) was changed between 0.0087–0.97 atm. The measurements were thus simultaneously performed at four different P(O2) between 7.5·10−20–5.6·10−17 atm. All the fitted parameters showed more or less dependency on the oxygen partial pressure and/or hydrogen partial pressure. RS, which is usually assumed to be the ohmic resistance from the electrolyte, also seemed to be affected by the simultaneous change in P(O2) and P(H2). All parameters except one were negatively affected by an increase in P(O2), meaning that an increase in P(O2) (or decrease of P(H2)) lead to an increase in the various resistances and a decrease in the rate constant. The only parameter that was positively affected was the Z 0 / D term (i.e. higher value when P(O2) increased or P(H2) decreased). However, the diffusion constant is the important parameter and it can be argued that since the diffusion term is in the denominator, it will also be negatively affected by an increase in P(O2) (or decrease of P(H2)), i.e. lower D when P(O2) increased (or P(H2) decreased).

Structural Characterization And Redox Behavior:
From the XRD investigation, the Nb-doped SrTiO3 (Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3) showed a cubic perovskite type structure after calcination both in air and in reducing atmosphere (P(O2)≈10−18 atm at 1100 °C), see Fig. 1 .
The isothermal redox behavior of Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3, calcined in reducing atmosphere at 1100 °C for 2 h and redox cycled twice at 850 °C is shown in Fig. 2 . Switching the gas from reducing atmosphere to air had an immediate effect on the P(O2) while in the opposite direction there was a delay before the P(O2) started to drop. This is probably explained by the difference in concentration between H2 (9% H2 in N2) and oxygen (21% O2 in air) in the different reduction and oxidation gases. It was also clear that the sample did not return to the same reduced state (seen as a lower [Ti3+]) after the redox cycles, at least not during the time intervals used in the experiment.

Electrochemical Characterization And Redox Stability:
3.2.1 Cone measurements Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy measurements were performed both at open circuit potential (OCP) and under polarization. The impedance spectra results from measurements under OCP and under cathodic polarization is shown in Fig. 3 . The contact area between the cone and the electrolyte was calculated by using Newman's formula [18]: (2) r=1 4 ⋅ σ ⋅ R S where r is the radius of the contact area, σ is the specific conductivity of the electrolyte material and RS is the resistance determined from the high frequency offset. The procedure for determining the contact area, and some problems associated with this method, is described elsewhere [17]. The specific conductivity of the electrolyte (in S/cm) was extracted from the paper by Appel et. al. [19]. At −300 mV (cathodic) overpotential (η) the polarization resistance was more than one order of magnitude smaller than at OCP while at η=+200 mV (anodic overpotential) the polarization resistance (RP ) was about a factor of two higher than at OCP. The cone measurement results indicate that Nb-doped SrTiO3 has a better performance in cathodic current direction compared to anodic. The spectra in Fig. 3 consisted of at least two overlapping semicircles and the same model was used to fit all spectra measured in the given temperature range and for all the gas compositions. The model used to fit the impedance data is shown in Fig. 3 as well. In this model R S relates to the ohmic drop in the electrolyte. Q 1 and R 1 are presumably related to the double layer capacitance and charge (ion) transfer impedance at the interface between the cone electrode and the electrolyte. Q 2 and R 2 are assumed to be related to the electrochemical kinetics of the electrode material [17]. RP is simply the sum of R 1 and R 2. Measurements at different temperatures and with various gas compositions were performed in order to try to elucidate the different electrochemical and physical processes that are responsible for the impedance response in Fig. 3. The activation energies (measurements between 650–1000 °C) for the resistive parts in the equivalent circuit model are shown in Table 1 together with the P(O2), P(H2) and P(H2O) dependence at 850 °C. The activation energies were found in the Arrhenius plots by multiplying the constant k in the linear regression shown in Eq. (3) with the gas constant. (3) ln ( 1 / R n )=k ⋅ ( 1 / T ) n=S, 1, or 2. The P(O2), P(H2), and P(H2O) dependence were found by the constant m in the linear regression shown in Eq. (4). (4) log ( 1 / R n )=m ⋅ log ( P ( X ) ) n=S, 1, or 2 and X=H2, O2, or H2O. Eq. (4) is a simple way of empirically evaluating the effect of the partial pressure of various reactant gases. It should be noted that there is no theoretical consideration behind selecting this equation. The activation energy for 1/R S was the same as reported for similar YSZ materials in the literature [19]. The activation energies of 1/R 1 and 1/R 2 indicate that these parameters are highly dependent on the temperature as well. The P(O2) variation (at constant P(H2O)) was conducted by changing the amount of N2 in the gas stream before the water saturation flask and thereby changing the P(H2)/P(H2O) ratio, and by this the P(O2). The P(H2O) was constant at approximately 0.037 atm while the P(H2) was changed between 0.0089–0.963 atm. The measurements were thus simultaneously performed at three different oxygen partial pressures, P(O2)=1.1·10−20–2.1·10−16 atm (measured with an oxygen sensor). In the constant P(O2) measurements, the P(H2) was varied by changing the amount of dry N2 in the gas stream and only letting H2 pass the water saturation flask, which kept the P(H2)/P(H2O) ratio constant, and hence a constant P(O2). The measurements were performed at three different hydrogen partial pressures, P(H2)=0.0963–0.963 atm. The P(H2O) was consequently simultaneously changed as well between 0.0037–0.037 atm. It is clear from Table 1 that both 1/R 1 and 1/R 2 were affected by a change in P(O2) (at constant P(H2O)) while 1/R S seemed to be virtually independent of the oxygen partial pressure. Only 1/R 2 was affected by the simultaneous change in P(H2) and P(H2O) (at constant P(O2)). 1/R S and 1/R 1 seemed to be rather independent of P(H2) and P(H2O) (at constant P(O2)). The slopes only deviated slightly from zero. Potential sweeps were also performed on the Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3 cone electrode. The results are shown in Fig. 4 . The features in the Fig. 4 are different depending on which direction the measurements started (cathodic or anodic current direction first). The material seems to perform better in cathodic current direction than in anodic current direction. A steep slope in Fig. 4, at a certain overpotential, indicate better performance. Similar results were shown in Fig. 3, where the polarization resistance was lower in cathodic current direction (splitting of water, electrolysis mode) than in anodic current direction (oxidation of hydrogen, fuel cell mode).
3.2.2 Symmetrical cell measurements Some impedance spectra from symmetrical cell measurements on porous electrodes at 850 °C in hydrogen humidified with water (97% H2/3% H2O) are shown in Fig. 5 . All spectra have been fitted with the same equivalent circuit containing a Gerischer impedance element, LRS(Q 1 R 1)G(Q 2 R 2). The circuit description code used here is described elsewhere [20]. The Gerischer impedance can be represented by a quite simple impedance relation [21]: (5) Z ( ω )=Z 0 D ⋅ ( k + j ω ) where k represents a reaction rate and D is a diffusion constant. It is clear from Fig. 5 that the composite with Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ (S94TNb10/YSZ) had an initial performance that was one order of magnitude better than the sample without YSZ. This indicates that the titanate has a very low ionic conductivity (σe >> σi ) and that YSZ improves the electrode performance by providing conduction of oxygen ions. The results from the redox cycles of the composite sample (Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ) are shown in Fig. 6 . Each measuring point was taken 13 h after the gas was switched back to wet H2 again. The polarization resistance increased from the initial value of 16.3 Ωcm2 to 29 Ωcm2 after two redox cycles, but from the second to the 19th redox cycle RP only increased by 12%. How the different parameters evolved over time after re-reduction during a redox cycle is shown in Fig. 7 where the sixth redox cycle is presented in more detail. R S and R 1 decreased slightly with time during the first seven hours, while R 2 and R G increased with time and were stable after 13 h. Similar behavior was seen for all redox cycles. The main components of RP appeared to be R 2 and R G (the real part of the Gerischer impedance when ω →0, RG=Z 0 / D · k), while R 1 appeared to be small (between 0.34–0.37 Ωcm2, see Fig. 6) and relatively constant with redox cycles. R S increased from an initial value of 0.47 Ωcm2 to 0.56 Ωcm2 after the 19th redox cycle (Fig. 6). However, R S and R1 decreased with time during re-reduction (see single redox cycle in Fig. 7). For the single component electrode symmetrical cells with Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3 (S94TNb10) the polarization resistance (R P ) decreased from an initial value of 163 Ωcm2 to 96 Ωcm2 after the third redox cycle. Samples that had been fabricated in air were reduced in-situ in wet H2 at 980 °C. The redox cycles were then performed at 850 °C. After the redox experiments, a more detailed analysis was performed for the symmetrical cells having the composite material (Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ) as the electrodes. The activation energies (measurements at four temperatures between 750–925 °C) for the different parts in the equivalent circuit model are shown in Table 2 together with the P(O2) and P(H2) dependence at 925 °C (at constant P(H2O)). The activation energies and the P(O2) and P(H2) dependence were extracted similarly as in the cone measurements previously explained (see Eqs. (3) and (4)). The activation energies indicate that all parameters are highly temperature dependent. The variation in P(O2) was conducted at 850 °C by changing the amount of N2 in the gas before the water saturation flask and thereby changing the P(H2)/P(H2O) ratio. The P(H2O) was constant at approximately 0.03 atm while the P(H2) was changed between 0.0087–0.97 atm. The measurements were thus simultaneously performed at four different P(O2) between 7.5·10−20–5.6·10−17 atm. All the fitted parameters showed more or less dependency on the oxygen partial pressure and/or hydrogen partial pressure. RS, which is usually assumed to be the ohmic resistance from the electrolyte, also seemed to be affected by the simultaneous change in P(O2) and P(H2). All parameters except one were negatively affected by an increase in P(O2), meaning that an increase in P(O2) (or decrease of P(H2)) lead to an increase in the various resistances and a decrease in the rate constant. The only parameter that was positively affected was the Z 0 / D term (i.e. higher value when P(O2) increased or P(H2) decreased). However, the diffusion constant is the important parameter and it can be argued that since the diffusion term is in the denominator, it will also be negatively affected by an increase in P(O2) (or decrease of P(H2)), i.e. lower D when P(O2) increased (or P(H2) decreased).

Cone Measurements:
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy measurements were performed both at open circuit potential (OCP) and under polarization. The impedance spectra results from measurements under OCP and under cathodic polarization is shown in Fig. 3 .
The contact area between the cone and the electrolyte was calculated by using Newman's formula [18]: (2) r=1 4 ⋅ σ ⋅ R S where r is the radius of the contact area, σ is the specific conductivity of the electrolyte material and RS is the resistance determined from the high frequency offset. The procedure for determining the contact area, and some problems associated with this method, is described elsewhere [17]. The specific conductivity of the electrolyte (in S/cm) was extracted from the paper by Appel et. al. [19].
At −300 mV (cathodic) overpotential (η) the polarization resistance was more than one order of magnitude smaller than at OCP while at η=+200 mV (anodic overpotential) the polarization resistance (RP ) was about a factor of two higher than at OCP. The cone measurement results indicate that Nb-doped SrTiO3 has a better performance in cathodic current direction compared to anodic. The spectra in Fig. 3 consisted of at least two overlapping semicircles and the same model was used to fit all spectra measured in the given temperature range and for all the gas compositions. The model used to fit the impedance data is shown in Fig. 3 as well. In this model R S relates to the ohmic drop in the electrolyte. Q 1 and R 1 are presumably related to the double layer capacitance and charge (ion) transfer impedance at the interface between the cone electrode and the electrolyte. Q 2 and R 2 are assumed to be related to the electrochemical kinetics of the electrode material [17]. RP is simply the sum of R 1 and R 2. Measurements at different temperatures and with various gas compositions were performed in order to try to elucidate the different electrochemical and physical processes that are responsible for the impedance response in Fig. 3.
The activation energies (measurements between 650–1000 °C) for the resistive parts in the equivalent circuit model are shown in Table 1 together with the P(O2), P(H2) and P(H2O) dependence at 850 °C. The activation energies were found in the Arrhenius plots by multiplying the constant k in the linear regression shown in Eq. (3) with the gas constant. (3) ln ( 1 / R n )=k ⋅ ( 1 / T ) n=S, 1, or 2. The P(O2), P(H2), and P(H2O) dependence were found by the constant m in the linear regression shown in Eq. (4). (4) log ( 1 / R n )=m ⋅ log ( P ( X ) ) n=S, 1, or 2 and X=H2, O2, or H2O. Eq. (4) is a simple way of empirically evaluating the effect of the partial pressure of various reactant gases. It should be noted that there is no theoretical consideration behind selecting this equation.
The activation energy for 1/R S was the same as reported for similar YSZ materials in the literature [19]. The activation energies of 1/R 1 and 1/R 2 indicate that these parameters are highly dependent on the temperature as well. The P(O2) variation (at constant P(H2O)) was conducted by changing the amount of N2 in the gas stream before the water saturation flask and thereby changing the P(H2)/P(H2O) ratio, and by this the P(O2). The P(H2O) was constant at approximately 0.037 atm while the P(H2) was changed between 0.0089–0.963 atm. The measurements were thus simultaneously performed at three different oxygen partial pressures, P(O2)=1.1·10−20–2.1·10−16 atm (measured with an oxygen sensor). In the constant P(O2) measurements, the P(H2) was varied by changing the amount of dry N2 in the gas stream and only letting H2 pass the water saturation flask, which kept the P(H2)/P(H2O) ratio constant, and hence a constant P(O2). The measurements were performed at three different hydrogen partial pressures, P(H2)=0.0963–0.963 atm. The P(H2O) was consequently simultaneously changed as well between 0.0037–0.037 atm. It is clear from Table 1 that both 1/R 1 and 1/R 2 were affected by a change in P(O2) (at constant P(H2O)) while 1/R S seemed to be virtually independent of the oxygen partial pressure. Only 1/R 2 was affected by the simultaneous change in P(H2) and P(H2O) (at constant P(O2)). 1/R S and 1/R 1 seemed to be rather independent of P(H2) and P(H2O) (at constant P(O2)). The slopes only deviated slightly from zero.
Potential sweeps were also performed on the Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3 cone electrode. The results are shown in Fig. 4 . The features in the Fig. 4 are different depending on which direction the measurements started (cathodic or anodic current direction first).
The material seems to perform better in cathodic current direction than in anodic current direction. A steep slope in Fig. 4, at a certain overpotential, indicate better performance. Similar results were shown in Fig. 3, where the polarization resistance was lower in cathodic current direction (splitting of water, electrolysis mode) than in anodic current direction (oxidation of hydrogen, fuel cell mode).

Symmetrical Cell Measurements:
The impedance of all symmetrical cell measurements could be fitted with a Gerischer impedance in combination with two RQ-circuits, an inductance (from the wires in the set-up), and an ohmic resistance. It can be shown that the Gerischer expression for non-aqueous systems can be derived by adding a side reaction in Fick's second law that affects the concentration [21]: (21) d c ( x , t ) d t=D ˜ d 2 c ( x , t ) d x 2 − k ⋅ c ( x , t ) c(x,t) is the excess concentration above the equilibrium concentration and k is the reaction rate of the side reaction. For semi-infinite diffusion with a side reaction the impedance solution from solving Fick's first and second laws will be equivalent with Eq. (21).
From the P(O2), and temperature dependence of the different fitted parameters, it might be possible to suggest a similar mechanism for the hydrogen oxidation and/or water reduction as already discussed for the cone electrode measurements.
It was quite unexpected that 1/R S varied with the P(O2) and not only with the temperature (see Table 2). However, similar behavior has been observed for thin layered chromite-titanate porous electrodes. For thin electrode layers (10–20 μm) the lateral electrode resistance added a significant contribution to the overall electrode impedance [42]. The effect of P(O2) on the ohmic resistance was ascribed to a limitation in the electronic conductivity in the thin film electrodes. A probable explanation, for the observed P(O2) dependence in the results presented here, could be a too low percolation of the electronically conductive phase in the Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ composite electrode. It might be argued that the Pt/(Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ) interface (at the Pt current collector) might be important for the size of the polarization resistance of the composite electrode as Pt is not an inert material. However, if that was the case, the polarization resistance would be expected to be much higher. Sholklapper et al [43] showed that the polarization resistance of a SOFC with a Pt — porous YSZ cathode was 110 Ωcm2, i.e. over 30 times higher than a similar SOFC with LSM infiltrated YSZ electrode (2.9 Ωcm2). Also the ohmic resistance (R S ) was more than 10 times higher for the cell with the non-infiltrated YSZ cathode [43]. The results presented here showed that R S of the single component Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3-electrode and the Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ composite electrode were similar. Combing these results with the much smaller polarization resistance of the composite electrode, indicates that it is the Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ interfaces in the composite electrode that provides the active reaction sites for the electrochemical reactions and not the Pt/(Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ) interfaces close to the current collector.
1/R 1 changed both with temperature and P(O2) (Table 2) and it is believed to be related to the defect chemistry/surface diffusion rate of oxide vacancies on the surface of the titanate or the transfer resistance of oxide vacancies from STN to YSZ, similar to what was discussed for the cone electrode measurements. The fact that R 1 decreased with time during re-reduction (see Fig. 7) suggests that as the sample was reduced, the concentration of Ti3+ and V O •• (at the surface) in the titanate increased which consequently lowered the resistance of R 1. The P(O2) dependence was slightly lower than for 1/R 1 in the cone electrode measurements. However, the temperature at which the P(O2) was changed was different in the symmetrical cell measurements (925 °C) compared to the cone electrode measurements (850 °C). Sintered samples were used in the cone electrode measurements to try to minimize the effect of porosity, whereas porous electrodes were used in the symmetrical cell measurements. The geometric effect could therefore be another cause for the observed difference in the P(O2) dependence. The equivalent capacitance, calculated by C ω=R (1− n ) / n Q 1/ n [44], at the summit frequency of the process at high frequency (R 1 Q 1) was in the same order of magnitude as for a typical double layer capacitance, i.e. ≈10–15 μFcm−2, and was relatively constant with temperature. The high frequency arc (R 1 Q 1) is suggested to relate to some charge transfer resistance and double layer capacitance at the Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ interface. The n-value of Q 1 was between 0.5–0.6. A double layer should theoretically have a n-value of 1. However, since the measurements were performed on porous electrodes there will be many sites where the charge transfer can take place. These distributed transfer sites can be modeled by a simple, one-dimensional transmission line. The n-value should then theoretically be halved and a double layer should therefore have a n-value of 0.5 as was observed in the measurements.
R 2 Q 2 presumably reflects the part of the electrode kinetics that is affected by the H 2 partial pressure, such as H 2 adsorption/desorption. R 2 was the dominant feature of the total polarization resistance and it is therefore believed that the limiting performance of this electrode material is due to an apparently low catalytic activity to dissociatively adsorb hydrogen on the surface. It is difficult to assign a process to the Gerischer impedance feature. The fitted parameters (k and Z 0 / D ) were both temperature dependent and dependent on the oxygen partial pressure. The model proposed by Adler [45] for mixed ionic and electronic conductors is probably not applicable to the titanate electrodes since the model breaks down for materials with low ionic conductivity. The model described oxygen transport inside the mixed conductor in competition with the oxygen exchange at its surface [45]. Since the oxygen ions are predominantly conducted in the YSZ phase in the composite electrode investigated here, the Gerischer impedance might reflect surface diffusion of oxide ions in Nb-doped SrTiO3, in combination with oxygen exchange at the surface and/or at the YSZ interfaces. The Gerischer response might also be due to proton diffusion at the surface in combination with hydrogen exchange at the surface, where the hydrogen species are associated with various defects at the surface, similar to the reactions (11) and (12) as discussed for the cone electrode measurements. Surface diffusion of different species, such as oxide ions or protons, might be possible in Nb-doped SrTiO3 since the amount of defects at the surface is expected to be larger than in the bulk. Oxygen vacancies together with Ti3+ are possibly more abundant at the surface than in the bulk.
Other authors have modeled their anodes with a Gerischer impedance [42,46]. It was suggested that poor electronic conductivity limited the electrode performance and gave a Gerischer response [42]. Low electronic conductivity should not be a problem in the Nb-doped titanate investigated here. The conductivity of Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3 was reported to be >120 S/cm at 1000 °C in reducing atmosphere (9% H2/N2) and since the material showed a metallic conductivity behavior the conductivity should increase with lower temperature [16]. However, the suggested low percolation of the titanate phase could be responsible. Although the parameters are not fully understood, it is suggested that a similar reaction mechanism model as described for the cone electrode measurements (reactions (11)–(15)) can be applied for the symmetrical cell measurements as well.
The absolute values of R P was very high compared to similar measurements on Ni-YSZ composite electrodes. The best reported R P value for a Ni-YSZ anode material, measured with symmetrical cells (with a similar YSZ electrolyte tape) in wet H 2, is approximately 0.11 Ωcm2 at 850 °C [47]. This means that the value reported here for the Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ composite has more than two orders of magnitude lower activity, but the fact that the electrode appears to be stable towards redox cycles is an interesting result. The results presented in Fig. 6 are promising since they showed that between the second and the 19th redox cycle at 850 °C the electrochemical activity did not drastically decrease. R P increased by 12%, and it is not clear if that had to do with the redox tests or due to another electrode degradation mechanism. The increase of R P after the second redox cycle (compared with the initial value) could probably be due to the difference in reduction temperature. The sample was reduced in situ at 980 °C and then the redox cycles were conducted at 850 °C. A similar behavior as shown in the TGA results in Fig. 2 might be expected. The decrease in activity during redox cycling was mainly due to an increase in R 2, which was ascribed to the dissociative adsorption of hydrogen. An increase in R 2 with redox cyclings could therefore indicate a loss of performance due to a change in the amount of exposed surfaces that are catalytically active and/or a lowering of the concentration of defect species. Similar behavior was seen during a single redox cycle. During re-reduction (Fig. 7) it was seen that R 2 increased with time. It could be argued that the surface of the titanate initially will have a higher concentration of defect species, e.g. surface oxygen vacancies. These are created as an outcome of the abrupt change in P(O2). As the time progress, the titanate will come closer to an equilibrium state where the defects will be more homogeneously distributed in the whole titanate structure, including the bulk. This will consequently decrease the concentration of defect species in the surface and thereby increase R 2. The apparently low diffusion rate of Sr-vacancies [29,30] is a probable explanation for the long time needed to reach equilibrium. It is believed that if the microstructure can be improved by improving the percolation of each conductive phase, the polarization resistance can be decreased. However, it appears to be necessary to introduce a more catalytically active material in order to improve the performance. La-doped SrTiO3 with some Mn substituting for Ti [48] and La-doped SrTiO3 with small additions of Mn and Ga on the Ti-site [7] have shown to be promising anode materials for SOFC. It is clear that more work is needed if SrTiO3-based materials are to be realized as SOFC anodes.

Discussion:
4.1 Structural characterization and redox characteristics Strontium (e.g. in LSM cathodes with high strontium content) is known to react with YSZ at elevated temperatures to form secondary phases at the interface between the cathode and the electrolyte [22,23]. The possible formation of new phases such as SrZrO3 at the interface with less favorable properties will have a negative impact on the cell performance. In order to minimize the possibility for excess strontium to exsolve from the perovskite and react with the electrolyte the nominal A:B-ratio was kept below 0.95, which is the theoretical A:B-ratio for the vacancy compensated material with 10 at.% Nb. A discussion about the defect chemistry of Nb-doped SrTiO3 with various Nb-doping and Sr/Ti-ratio is given elsewhere [16]. In this study the Nb-doped SrTiO3 samples were formulated assuming Sr-vacancy compensation of the donors. According to the commonly accepted defect chemistry model for donor-doped SrTiO3, the donor compensation mechanism shifts from the cation vacancy to the electronic type when the compound is exposed to low P(O2) during sintering [16,24]: (6) y V ″ Sr + y Ti Ti + 3 y O O ↔ y / 2 O 2 + 2 y e ′ + y TiO 2 The results from TGA agree with the defect chemistry model described by Moos [24]. According to the model there should not be any oxygen substoichiometry in the materials, at least not in the investigated temperature and P(O2) range. Oxygen vacancies will not be formed until all Nb-atoms have been electronically compensated by Ti3+. The oxygen stoichiometry from TGA was used to calculate the amount of Ti3+ (2 ye' in reaction (6)) in the sample, which was in agreement with the defect chemistry model [16,24]. However, the material did not return to the same initial reduced state after the redox cycles (see Fig. 2). That was probably due to that the samples were calcined in reducing atmosphere at 1100 °C while the redox tests were performed at a lower temperature of 850 °C. The temperature at which the sample is reduced is thus an important parameter when discussing the redox stability of these materials. The TGA results (Fig. 2) also indicated that the rate for oxidation was faster than the rate for reduction. One possible explanation could be that the change in strontium vacancy concentration plays a major role to this effect by increasing the rate of equilibration of the strontium ion lattice as the material is oxidized [25–27] (c.f. reaction (6)). It has been proposed in the literature that the equilibration mechanisms of n-doped SrTiO3 depend on the diffusion of Sr via Sr vacancies [25–30]. The Sr and Sr-vacancy diffusion coefficients are extremely low for n-doped titanates, in the order of 10−16 cm2s−1 at temperatures above 1300 °C [26,27]. During reduction strontium vacancies are consumed (rightward direction of reaction (6)) which immediately slows down the diffusion of strontium ions in the surface region, hence the slower rate for reduction compared to oxidation. Chemical compatibility of the Nb-doped titanates with YSZ was tested by intimately mixing 1:1 (by weight) mixtures of pre-calcined YSZ and Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3. The powder mixtures were pressed into pellets and fired in air or in reducing atmosphere (9% H2 in N2) at 1250 °C for 12 h. The following XRD investigation indicated no reaction under any of these conditions. However, it is not possible from these experiments to be certain that no reaction would occur upon prolonged heating or during numerous redox cycles. The possible formation of new phases such as SrZrO3, or Ti-dissolution in the YSZ, at the interface with less favorable properties [31] would have a negative impact on the cell performance and must be avoided.
4.2 Electrochemical performance and redox stability 4.2.1 Cone electrode measurements The study of electrode kinetics in a system based on an oxygen ion-conducting electrolyte is often troublesome due to the use of porous electrodes. Porous electrodes add geometrical complications such as current dependent reaction zones and current pathways. The technique of using cone shaped electrodes was initially developed by Fabry, Kleitz and Deportes [32,33] and similar techniques has been used by several other authors [34–37]. The use of cone shaped electrodes appeared to be a useful tool for comparing the relative differences in the electrocatalytic activity between different materials with a minimization of the effect of porosity [17]. Minimizing of the effect of morphology by using dense cone shaped electrodes was attempted to get a better understanding of the mechanisms governing the electrochemical behavior of Nb-doped SrTiO3 as an electrode material in SOFC. The impedance data was fitted with the same equivalent circuit model as was used for cone electrode measurements of undoped SrTiO3 [17]. The EIS data were fitted to the equivalent circuit R S (Q 1[R 1(RQ)2]), following the circuit description codes used elsewhere [20]. Following the same discussion from undoped SrTiO3 measurements [17], it seems probable that R 1 Q 1 relate to some charge transfer resistance and double layer capacitance at the interface between the electrode and the electrolyte. R 2 Q 2 presumably reflects the part of the electrode kinetics that is affected by the H 2 partial pressure, i.e. the surface reactions involving dissociative adsorption of H 2 and surface diffusion. The various n-values, which are the exponents of the constant phase angle elements (Q), have also been analyzed. For Q 1, the n-value ranged approximately between 0.8–0.9, which suggests that Q 1 has a high degree of capacitive nature. A double layer should theoretically give a n-value of 1, which would be equivalent to a pure flat capacitor. However, the interface between the cone and the electrolyte consist of a rough three-dimensional contact region [17]. The non-ideal contact interface could be one reason for the deviation from unity. For Q 2, the n-value ranged between 0.55–0.7. As this value is near 0.5 the process might reflect surface and/or bulk diffusion limitations. From the P(O2), P(H2), P(H2O), and temperature dependencies of the different fitted resistance parameters, it might be possible to suggest a rough mechanism for the hydrogen oxidation and/or water reduction. When P(H2) and P(H2O) were changed, by keeping the P(H2O)/P(H2) ratio constant (equivalent to a constant P(O2)), only 1/R 2 was affected. 1/R 1 and 1/R S were virtually constant (see Table 1). When P(O2) and P(H2) were changed (at constant P(H2O)), by varying the P(H2O)/P(H2) ratio, both 1/R 1 and 1/R 2 changed while 1/R S was approximately constant. The fact that 1/R 1 was affected by a change in P(O2), approximately P(O2)−1/6 (from Table 1), but not by a change in P(H2) (at constant P(O2) indicates a process that is affected by the defect chemistry in Nb-doped SrTiO3. The process is believed to depend on the formation of oxygen vacancies in the surface region of the Nb-doped SrTiO3 cone electrode. Oxygen vacancies are twofold positively ionized by emitting two electrons into the conduction band: (7) O O x ↔ V O • • + 2 e ′ + 1 / 2 O 2 The mass-action law can be written as: (8) [ V O • • ] n 2 P ( O 2 ) 1 / 2=K V O • • ( T ) where K V O •• (T) represents the temperature dependent formation constant of doubly ionized oxygen vacancies. [OO x ] is assumed to be constant. If it is further assumed that only oxygen vacancies contribute to the variation in the total charge carrier concentration: (9) n ≈ 2 [ V O • • ] the conductivity will only vary with the carrier concentration and its temperature dependent mobility (µn(T)). (10) σ ≈ σ n=e n μ n ( T ) Combining Eqs. (8)–(10) leads to a simplified expression for the conductivity with a P(O2)−1/6 dependence. However, according to the defect chemistry model for Nb-doped SrTiO3 [16,24], the conductivity should have a P(O2)−1/4 dependence in the investigated P(O2) range. It might therefore be speculated that the P(O2)−1/6 dependence of 1/R 1 might be due to a surface mechanism, only incorporating the defect concentrations of oxygen vacancies and Ti3+ close to the surface. It is probable that surface species are reduced more easily than the bulk. This could give a different P(O2) dependence compared to the bulk conductivity model. 1/R 2 was dependent on both P(O2) and P(H2) (both at constant P(H2O) and P(O2)) and had a slightly higher activation energy compared to 1/R 1. From these observations the following reaction model is suggested: (11) H 2 ( g ) + 2 O O(STN) x ↔ 2 O H O(STN) • + 2 e ′ (12) 2 O H O(STN) • + 2 O O(YSZ) x ↔ diffusion surface/bulk 2 O H O(YSZ) • + 2 O O(STN) x (13) 2 O H O(YSZ) • ↔ O O(YSZ) x + H 2 O O(YSZ) • • (14) H 2 O O(YSZ) • • ↔ H 2 O ( g ) + V O(YSZ) • • (15) V O(YSZ) • • + 2 e ′ + 1 / 2 O 2 ( g ) ↔ O O(YSZ) x where the subscript STN denotes species associated with the Nb-doped SrTiO3 surface and the subscript YSZ corresponds to species associated with the YSZ (electrolyte) surface. It is believed that hydrogen adsorption and dissociation preferentially takes place on the surface of the Nb-doped SrTiO3 (STN), where it is associated with surface oxygen in STN (reaction (11)). The conductivity of Nb-doped SrTiO3 has been shown to follow a phonon scattering mechanism (i.e. have a metallic conductivity behavior) [13,16]. This would imply that the electrons formed in reaction (11) will be transferred into the conduction band of the titanate. An increased amount of Ti3+ will facilitate the conduction of the electrons away from the reaction site. A low P(O2) will increase the surface [Ti3+] which increases the electronic conductivity and thereby decrease the polarization resistance, as was seen in the impedance measurements when P(O2) was decreased and during cathodic polarization. Thus, the electrons formed will be removed relatively fast from the surface and thereby promote the rightward direction of reaction (11). The hydrogen is suggested to diffuse via the oxygen lattice in some surface and/or bulk diffusion to the triple phase boundary and then across the electrode/electrolyte interface (charge transfer resistance — reaction (12)). Reactions (13)–(15) are the suggested subsequent reaction paths occurring at the YSZ surface. It is believed that the major rate limiting step is the adsorption, dissociation, and diffusion of hydrogen species on the STN surface, associated with R 2 Q 2. It appears as if the catalytic activity for oxidizing hydrogen is low in these materials, as has been suggested in the literature as well [12]. The low oxygen ion conductivity, at least in the bulk, is due to the defect chemistry of Nb-doped SrTiO3 [16,24]. This is another factor that limits the performance of these materials. The reactions will therefore probably only occur close to the triple phase boundaries. The low activity for hydrogen oxidation was visible in the potential sweep in Fig. 4. At anodic overpotentials the evolved current was very low. However, the activity appeared to be much higher in the cathodic direction. In the literature it has been shown that reduced SrTiO3 (100) single crystal surfaces were active for the reduction of H2O and CH3OH. The reaction mechanisms were shown to involve the defect species at the surface of the titanate, namely Ti3+ and oxygen vacancies [38–41]. It is therefore implied that a slightly different mechanism occurs when water is reduced to H2 on the surfaces of Nb-doped SrTiO3 (STN) under cathodic polarization. A possible reaction mechanism could be: (16) 2 Ti Ti x + 2 e ′ ↔ 2 T i ′ Ti (17) H 2 O ( g ) + V O(STN) • • + O O(STN) x ↔ 2 OH O(STN) • (18) 2 OH O(STN) • + 2 T i ′ Ti ↔ H 2 ( g ) + 2 O O(STN) x + 2 Ti Ti x (19) O O(STN) x + V O(YSZ) • • ↔ diffusion surface/bulk O O(YSZ) x + V O(STN) • • (20) O O(YSZ) x ↔ V O(YSZ) • • + 2 e ′ + 1 / 2 O 2 ( g ) Reactions (16)–(20) most probably occurs in several step but similar reaction mechanisms were suggested for the adsorption/desorption experiments on reduced SrTiO3 single crystals [38–41]. The performance at cathodic overpotentials is probably limited by the low oxygen diffusion rate (due to low oxygen vacancy concentration in the bulk) from the Nb-doped SrTiO3 cone electrode to the electrolyte. The potential sweeps in Fig. 4, especially in the anodic region, were different depending on which direction the sweep started. A tentative explanation for the behavior might be that more Ti3+ and V O(STN) •• close to the cone electrode surface are formed, due to more reducing conditions, when the sweep is started in the cathodic direction. In the subsequent anodic direction the increased concentration of Ti3+ and V O(STN) •• imply a higher electrocatalytic activity resulting in a higher current density. 4.2.2 Symmetrical cell measurements The impedance of all symmetrical cell measurements could be fitted with a Gerischer impedance in combination with two RQ-circuits, an inductance (from the wires in the set-up), and an ohmic resistance. It can be shown that the Gerischer expression for non-aqueous systems can be derived by adding a side reaction in Fick's second law that affects the concentration [21]: (21) d c ( x , t ) d t=D ˜ d 2 c ( x , t ) d x 2 − k ⋅ c ( x , t ) c(x,t) is the excess concentration above the equilibrium concentration and k is the reaction rate of the side reaction. For semi-infinite diffusion with a side reaction the impedance solution from solving Fick's first and second laws will be equivalent with Eq. (21). From the P(O2), and temperature dependence of the different fitted parameters, it might be possible to suggest a similar mechanism for the hydrogen oxidation and/or water reduction as already discussed for the cone electrode measurements. It was quite unexpected that 1/R S varied with the P(O2) and not only with the temperature (see Table 2). However, similar behavior has been observed for thin layered chromite-titanate porous electrodes. For thin electrode layers (10–20 μm) the lateral electrode resistance added a significant contribution to the overall electrode impedance [42]. The effect of P(O2) on the ohmic resistance was ascribed to a limitation in the electronic conductivity in the thin film electrodes. A probable explanation, for the observed P(O2) dependence in the results presented here, could be a too low percolation of the electronically conductive phase in the Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ composite electrode. It might be argued that the Pt/(Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ) interface (at the Pt current collector) might be important for the size of the polarization resistance of the composite electrode as Pt is not an inert material. However, if that was the case, the polarization resistance would be expected to be much higher. Sholklapper et al [43] showed that the polarization resistance of a SOFC with a Pt — porous YSZ cathode was 110 Ωcm2, i.e. over 30 times higher than a similar SOFC with LSM infiltrated YSZ electrode (2.9 Ωcm2). Also the ohmic resistance (R S ) was more than 10 times higher for the cell with the non-infiltrated YSZ cathode [43]. The results presented here showed that R S of the single component Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3-electrode and the Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ composite electrode were similar. Combing these results with the much smaller polarization resistance of the composite electrode, indicates that it is the Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ interfaces in the composite electrode that provides the active reaction sites for the electrochemical reactions and not the Pt/(Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ) interfaces close to the current collector. 1/R 1 changed both with temperature and P(O2) (Table 2) and it is believed to be related to the defect chemistry/surface diffusion rate of oxide vacancies on the surface of the titanate or the transfer resistance of oxide vacancies from STN to YSZ, similar to what was discussed for the cone electrode measurements. The fact that R 1 decreased with time during re-reduction (see Fig. 7) suggests that as the sample was reduced, the concentration of Ti3+ and V O •• (at the surface) in the titanate increased which consequently lowered the resistance of R 1. The P(O2) dependence was slightly lower than for 1/R 1 in the cone electrode measurements. However, the temperature at which the P(O2) was changed was different in the symmetrical cell measurements (925 °C) compared to the cone electrode measurements (850 °C). Sintered samples were used in the cone electrode measurements to try to minimize the effect of porosity, whereas porous electrodes were used in the symmetrical cell measurements. The geometric effect could therefore be another cause for the observed difference in the P(O2) dependence. The equivalent capacitance, calculated by C ω=R (1− n ) / n Q 1/ n [44], at the summit frequency of the process at high frequency (R 1 Q 1) was in the same order of magnitude as for a typical double layer capacitance, i.e. ≈10–15 μFcm−2, and was relatively constant with temperature. The high frequency arc (R 1 Q 1) is suggested to relate to some charge transfer resistance and double layer capacitance at the Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ interface. The n-value of Q 1 was between 0.5–0.6. A double layer should theoretically have a n-value of 1. However, since the measurements were performed on porous electrodes there will be many sites where the charge transfer can take place. These distributed transfer sites can be modeled by a simple, one-dimensional transmission line. The n-value should then theoretically be halved and a double layer should therefore have a n-value of 0.5 as was observed in the measurements. R 2 Q 2 presumably reflects the part of the electrode kinetics that is affected by the H 2 partial pressure, such as H 2 adsorption/desorption. R 2 was the dominant feature of the total polarization resistance and it is therefore believed that the limiting performance of this electrode material is due to an apparently low catalytic activity to dissociatively adsorb hydrogen on the surface. It is difficult to assign a process to the Gerischer impedance feature. The fitted parameters (k and Z 0 / D ) were both temperature dependent and dependent on the oxygen partial pressure. The model proposed by Adler [45] for mixed ionic and electronic conductors is probably not applicable to the titanate electrodes since the model breaks down for materials with low ionic conductivity. The model described oxygen transport inside the mixed conductor in competition with the oxygen exchange at its surface [45]. Since the oxygen ions are predominantly conducted in the YSZ phase in the composite electrode investigated here, the Gerischer impedance might reflect surface diffusion of oxide ions in Nb-doped SrTiO3, in combination with oxygen exchange at the surface and/or at the YSZ interfaces. The Gerischer response might also be due to proton diffusion at the surface in combination with hydrogen exchange at the surface, where the hydrogen species are associated with various defects at the surface, similar to the reactions (11) and (12) as discussed for the cone electrode measurements. Surface diffusion of different species, such as oxide ions or protons, might be possible in Nb-doped SrTiO3 since the amount of defects at the surface is expected to be larger than in the bulk. Oxygen vacancies together with Ti3+ are possibly more abundant at the surface than in the bulk. Other authors have modeled their anodes with a Gerischer impedance [42,46]. It was suggested that poor electronic conductivity limited the electrode performance and gave a Gerischer response [42]. Low electronic conductivity should not be a problem in the Nb-doped titanate investigated here. The conductivity of Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3 was reported to be >120 S/cm at 1000 °C in reducing atmosphere (9% H2/N2) and since the material showed a metallic conductivity behavior the conductivity should increase with lower temperature [16]. However, the suggested low percolation of the titanate phase could be responsible. Although the parameters are not fully understood, it is suggested that a similar reaction mechanism model as described for the cone electrode measurements (reactions (11)–(15)) can be applied for the symmetrical cell measurements as well. The absolute values of R P was very high compared to similar measurements on Ni-YSZ composite electrodes. The best reported R P value for a Ni-YSZ anode material, measured with symmetrical cells (with a similar YSZ electrolyte tape) in wet H 2, is approximately 0.11 Ωcm2 at 850 °C [47]. This means that the value reported here for the Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ composite has more than two orders of magnitude lower activity, but the fact that the electrode appears to be stable towards redox cycles is an interesting result. The results presented in Fig. 6 are promising since they showed that between the second and the 19th redox cycle at 850 °C the electrochemical activity did not drastically decrease. R P increased by 12%, and it is not clear if that had to do with the redox tests or due to another electrode degradation mechanism. The increase of R P after the second redox cycle (compared with the initial value) could probably be due to the difference in reduction temperature. The sample was reduced in situ at 980 °C and then the redox cycles were conducted at 850 °C. A similar behavior as shown in the TGA results in Fig. 2 might be expected. The decrease in activity during redox cycling was mainly due to an increase in R 2, which was ascribed to the dissociative adsorption of hydrogen. An increase in R 2 with redox cyclings could therefore indicate a loss of performance due to a change in the amount of exposed surfaces that are catalytically active and/or a lowering of the concentration of defect species. Similar behavior was seen during a single redox cycle. During re-reduction (Fig. 7) it was seen that R 2 increased with time. It could be argued that the surface of the titanate initially will have a higher concentration of defect species, e.g. surface oxygen vacancies. These are created as an outcome of the abrupt change in P(O2). As the time progress, the titanate will come closer to an equilibrium state where the defects will be more homogeneously distributed in the whole titanate structure, including the bulk. This will consequently decrease the concentration of defect species in the surface and thereby increase R 2. The apparently low diffusion rate of Sr-vacancies [29,30] is a probable explanation for the long time needed to reach equilibrium. It is believed that if the microstructure can be improved by improving the percolation of each conductive phase, the polarization resistance can be decreased. However, it appears to be necessary to introduce a more catalytically active material in order to improve the performance. La-doped SrTiO3 with some Mn substituting for Ti [48] and La-doped SrTiO3 with small additions of Mn and Ga on the Ti-site [7] have shown to be promising anode materials for SOFC. It is clear that more work is needed if SrTiO3-based materials are to be realized as SOFC anodes.

Structural Characterization And Redox Characteristics:
Strontium (e.g. in LSM cathodes with high strontium content) is known to react with YSZ at elevated temperatures to form secondary phases at the interface between the cathode and the electrolyte [22,23]. The possible formation of new phases such as SrZrO3 at the interface with less favorable properties will have a negative impact on the cell performance. In order to minimize the possibility for excess strontium to exsolve from the perovskite and react with the electrolyte the nominal A:B-ratio was kept below 0.95, which is the theoretical A:B-ratio for the vacancy compensated material with 10 at.% Nb. A discussion about the defect chemistry of Nb-doped SrTiO3 with various Nb-doping and Sr/Ti-ratio is given elsewhere [16].
In this study the Nb-doped SrTiO3 samples were formulated assuming Sr-vacancy compensation of the donors. According to the commonly accepted defect chemistry model for donor-doped SrTiO3, the donor compensation mechanism shifts from the cation vacancy to the electronic type when the compound is exposed to low P(O2) during sintering [16,24]: (6) y V ″ Sr + y Ti Ti + 3 y O O ↔ y / 2 O 2 + 2 y e ′ + y TiO 2
The results from TGA agree with the defect chemistry model described by Moos [24]. According to the model there should not be any oxygen substoichiometry in the materials, at least not in the investigated temperature and P(O2) range. Oxygen vacancies will not be formed until all Nb-atoms have been electronically compensated by Ti3+. The oxygen stoichiometry from TGA was used to calculate the amount of Ti3+ (2 ye' in reaction (6)) in the sample, which was in agreement with the defect chemistry model [16,24]. However, the material did not return to the same initial reduced state after the redox cycles (see Fig. 2). That was probably due to that the samples were calcined in reducing atmosphere at 1100 °C while the redox tests were performed at a lower temperature of 850 °C. The temperature at which the sample is reduced is thus an important parameter when discussing the redox stability of these materials. The TGA results (Fig. 2) also indicated that the rate for oxidation was faster than the rate for reduction. One possible explanation could be that the change in strontium vacancy concentration plays a major role to this effect by increasing the rate of equilibration of the strontium ion lattice as the material is oxidized [25–27] (c.f. reaction (6)). It has been proposed in the literature that the equilibration mechanisms of n-doped SrTiO3 depend on the diffusion of Sr via Sr vacancies [25–30]. The Sr and Sr-vacancy diffusion coefficients are extremely low for n-doped titanates, in the order of 10−16 cm2s−1 at temperatures above 1300 °C [26,27]. During reduction strontium vacancies are consumed (rightward direction of reaction (6)) which immediately slows down the diffusion of strontium ions in the surface region, hence the slower rate for reduction compared to oxidation.
Chemical compatibility of the Nb-doped titanates with YSZ was tested by intimately mixing 1:1 (by weight) mixtures of pre-calcined YSZ and Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3. The powder mixtures were pressed into pellets and fired in air or in reducing atmosphere (9% H2 in N2) at 1250 °C for 12 h. The following XRD investigation indicated no reaction under any of these conditions. However, it is not possible from these experiments to be certain that no reaction would occur upon prolonged heating or during numerous redox cycles. The possible formation of new phases such as SrZrO3, or Ti-dissolution in the YSZ, at the interface with less favorable properties [31] would have a negative impact on the cell performance and must be avoided.

Electrochemical Performance And Redox Stability:
4.2.1 Cone electrode measurements The study of electrode kinetics in a system based on an oxygen ion-conducting electrolyte is often troublesome due to the use of porous electrodes. Porous electrodes add geometrical complications such as current dependent reaction zones and current pathways. The technique of using cone shaped electrodes was initially developed by Fabry, Kleitz and Deportes [32,33] and similar techniques has been used by several other authors [34–37]. The use of cone shaped electrodes appeared to be a useful tool for comparing the relative differences in the electrocatalytic activity between different materials with a minimization of the effect of porosity [17]. Minimizing of the effect of morphology by using dense cone shaped electrodes was attempted to get a better understanding of the mechanisms governing the electrochemical behavior of Nb-doped SrTiO3 as an electrode material in SOFC. The impedance data was fitted with the same equivalent circuit model as was used for cone electrode measurements of undoped SrTiO3 [17]. The EIS data were fitted to the equivalent circuit R S (Q 1[R 1(RQ)2]), following the circuit description codes used elsewhere [20]. Following the same discussion from undoped SrTiO3 measurements [17], it seems probable that R 1 Q 1 relate to some charge transfer resistance and double layer capacitance at the interface between the electrode and the electrolyte. R 2 Q 2 presumably reflects the part of the electrode kinetics that is affected by the H 2 partial pressure, i.e. the surface reactions involving dissociative adsorption of H 2 and surface diffusion. The various n-values, which are the exponents of the constant phase angle elements (Q), have also been analyzed. For Q 1, the n-value ranged approximately between 0.8–0.9, which suggests that Q 1 has a high degree of capacitive nature. A double layer should theoretically give a n-value of 1, which would be equivalent to a pure flat capacitor. However, the interface between the cone and the electrolyte consist of a rough three-dimensional contact region [17]. The non-ideal contact interface could be one reason for the deviation from unity. For Q 2, the n-value ranged between 0.55–0.7. As this value is near 0.5 the process might reflect surface and/or bulk diffusion limitations. From the P(O2), P(H2), P(H2O), and temperature dependencies of the different fitted resistance parameters, it might be possible to suggest a rough mechanism for the hydrogen oxidation and/or water reduction. When P(H2) and P(H2O) were changed, by keeping the P(H2O)/P(H2) ratio constant (equivalent to a constant P(O2)), only 1/R 2 was affected. 1/R 1 and 1/R S were virtually constant (see Table 1). When P(O2) and P(H2) were changed (at constant P(H2O)), by varying the P(H2O)/P(H2) ratio, both 1/R 1 and 1/R 2 changed while 1/R S was approximately constant. The fact that 1/R 1 was affected by a change in P(O2), approximately P(O2)−1/6 (from Table 1), but not by a change in P(H2) (at constant P(O2) indicates a process that is affected by the defect chemistry in Nb-doped SrTiO3. The process is believed to depend on the formation of oxygen vacancies in the surface region of the Nb-doped SrTiO3 cone electrode. Oxygen vacancies are twofold positively ionized by emitting two electrons into the conduction band: (7) O O x ↔ V O • • + 2 e ′ + 1 / 2 O 2 The mass-action law can be written as: (8) [ V O • • ] n 2 P ( O 2 ) 1 / 2=K V O • • ( T ) where K V O •• (T) represents the temperature dependent formation constant of doubly ionized oxygen vacancies. [OO x ] is assumed to be constant. If it is further assumed that only oxygen vacancies contribute to the variation in the total charge carrier concentration: (9) n ≈ 2 [ V O • • ] the conductivity will only vary with the carrier concentration and its temperature dependent mobility (µn(T)). (10) σ ≈ σ n=e n μ n ( T ) Combining Eqs. (8)–(10) leads to a simplified expression for the conductivity with a P(O2)−1/6 dependence. However, according to the defect chemistry model for Nb-doped SrTiO3 [16,24], the conductivity should have a P(O2)−1/4 dependence in the investigated P(O2) range. It might therefore be speculated that the P(O2)−1/6 dependence of 1/R 1 might be due to a surface mechanism, only incorporating the defect concentrations of oxygen vacancies and Ti3+ close to the surface. It is probable that surface species are reduced more easily than the bulk. This could give a different P(O2) dependence compared to the bulk conductivity model. 1/R 2 was dependent on both P(O2) and P(H2) (both at constant P(H2O) and P(O2)) and had a slightly higher activation energy compared to 1/R 1. From these observations the following reaction model is suggested: (11) H 2 ( g ) + 2 O O(STN) x ↔ 2 O H O(STN) • + 2 e ′ (12) 2 O H O(STN) • + 2 O O(YSZ) x ↔ diffusion surface/bulk 2 O H O(YSZ) • + 2 O O(STN) x (13) 2 O H O(YSZ) • ↔ O O(YSZ) x + H 2 O O(YSZ) • • (14) H 2 O O(YSZ) • • ↔ H 2 O ( g ) + V O(YSZ) • • (15) V O(YSZ) • • + 2 e ′ + 1 / 2 O 2 ( g ) ↔ O O(YSZ) x where the subscript STN denotes species associated with the Nb-doped SrTiO3 surface and the subscript YSZ corresponds to species associated with the YSZ (electrolyte) surface. It is believed that hydrogen adsorption and dissociation preferentially takes place on the surface of the Nb-doped SrTiO3 (STN), where it is associated with surface oxygen in STN (reaction (11)). The conductivity of Nb-doped SrTiO3 has been shown to follow a phonon scattering mechanism (i.e. have a metallic conductivity behavior) [13,16]. This would imply that the electrons formed in reaction (11) will be transferred into the conduction band of the titanate. An increased amount of Ti3+ will facilitate the conduction of the electrons away from the reaction site. A low P(O2) will increase the surface [Ti3+] which increases the electronic conductivity and thereby decrease the polarization resistance, as was seen in the impedance measurements when P(O2) was decreased and during cathodic polarization. Thus, the electrons formed will be removed relatively fast from the surface and thereby promote the rightward direction of reaction (11). The hydrogen is suggested to diffuse via the oxygen lattice in some surface and/or bulk diffusion to the triple phase boundary and then across the electrode/electrolyte interface (charge transfer resistance — reaction (12)). Reactions (13)–(15) are the suggested subsequent reaction paths occurring at the YSZ surface. It is believed that the major rate limiting step is the adsorption, dissociation, and diffusion of hydrogen species on the STN surface, associated with R 2 Q 2. It appears as if the catalytic activity for oxidizing hydrogen is low in these materials, as has been suggested in the literature as well [12]. The low oxygen ion conductivity, at least in the bulk, is due to the defect chemistry of Nb-doped SrTiO3 [16,24]. This is another factor that limits the performance of these materials. The reactions will therefore probably only occur close to the triple phase boundaries. The low activity for hydrogen oxidation was visible in the potential sweep in Fig. 4. At anodic overpotentials the evolved current was very low. However, the activity appeared to be much higher in the cathodic direction. In the literature it has been shown that reduced SrTiO3 (100) single crystal surfaces were active for the reduction of H2O and CH3OH. The reaction mechanisms were shown to involve the defect species at the surface of the titanate, namely Ti3+ and oxygen vacancies [38–41]. It is therefore implied that a slightly different mechanism occurs when water is reduced to H2 on the surfaces of Nb-doped SrTiO3 (STN) under cathodic polarization. A possible reaction mechanism could be: (16) 2 Ti Ti x + 2 e ′ ↔ 2 T i ′ Ti (17) H 2 O ( g ) + V O(STN) • • + O O(STN) x ↔ 2 OH O(STN) • (18) 2 OH O(STN) • + 2 T i ′ Ti ↔ H 2 ( g ) + 2 O O(STN) x + 2 Ti Ti x (19) O O(STN) x + V O(YSZ) • • ↔ diffusion surface/bulk O O(YSZ) x + V O(STN) • • (20) O O(YSZ) x ↔ V O(YSZ) • • + 2 e ′ + 1 / 2 O 2 ( g ) Reactions (16)–(20) most probably occurs in several step but similar reaction mechanisms were suggested for the adsorption/desorption experiments on reduced SrTiO3 single crystals [38–41]. The performance at cathodic overpotentials is probably limited by the low oxygen diffusion rate (due to low oxygen vacancy concentration in the bulk) from the Nb-doped SrTiO3 cone electrode to the electrolyte. The potential sweeps in Fig. 4, especially in the anodic region, were different depending on which direction the sweep started. A tentative explanation for the behavior might be that more Ti3+ and V O(STN) •• close to the cone electrode surface are formed, due to more reducing conditions, when the sweep is started in the cathodic direction. In the subsequent anodic direction the increased concentration of Ti3+ and V O(STN) •• imply a higher electrocatalytic activity resulting in a higher current density.
4.2.2 Symmetrical cell measurements The impedance of all symmetrical cell measurements could be fitted with a Gerischer impedance in combination with two RQ-circuits, an inductance (from the wires in the set-up), and an ohmic resistance. It can be shown that the Gerischer expression for non-aqueous systems can be derived by adding a side reaction in Fick's second law that affects the concentration [21]: (21) d c ( x , t ) d t=D ˜ d 2 c ( x , t ) d x 2 − k ⋅ c ( x , t ) c(x,t) is the excess concentration above the equilibrium concentration and k is the reaction rate of the side reaction. For semi-infinite diffusion with a side reaction the impedance solution from solving Fick's first and second laws will be equivalent with Eq. (21). From the P(O2), and temperature dependence of the different fitted parameters, it might be possible to suggest a similar mechanism for the hydrogen oxidation and/or water reduction as already discussed for the cone electrode measurements. It was quite unexpected that 1/R S varied with the P(O2) and not only with the temperature (see Table 2). However, similar behavior has been observed for thin layered chromite-titanate porous electrodes. For thin electrode layers (10–20 μm) the lateral electrode resistance added a significant contribution to the overall electrode impedance [42]. The effect of P(O2) on the ohmic resistance was ascribed to a limitation in the electronic conductivity in the thin film electrodes. A probable explanation, for the observed P(O2) dependence in the results presented here, could be a too low percolation of the electronically conductive phase in the Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ composite electrode. It might be argued that the Pt/(Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ) interface (at the Pt current collector) might be important for the size of the polarization resistance of the composite electrode as Pt is not an inert material. However, if that was the case, the polarization resistance would be expected to be much higher. Sholklapper et al [43] showed that the polarization resistance of a SOFC with a Pt — porous YSZ cathode was 110 Ωcm2, i.e. over 30 times higher than a similar SOFC with LSM infiltrated YSZ electrode (2.9 Ωcm2). Also the ohmic resistance (R S ) was more than 10 times higher for the cell with the non-infiltrated YSZ cathode [43]. The results presented here showed that R S of the single component Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3-electrode and the Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ composite electrode were similar. Combing these results with the much smaller polarization resistance of the composite electrode, indicates that it is the Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ interfaces in the composite electrode that provides the active reaction sites for the electrochemical reactions and not the Pt/(Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ) interfaces close to the current collector. 1/R 1 changed both with temperature and P(O2) (Table 2) and it is believed to be related to the defect chemistry/surface diffusion rate of oxide vacancies on the surface of the titanate or the transfer resistance of oxide vacancies from STN to YSZ, similar to what was discussed for the cone electrode measurements. The fact that R 1 decreased with time during re-reduction (see Fig. 7) suggests that as the sample was reduced, the concentration of Ti3+ and V O •• (at the surface) in the titanate increased which consequently lowered the resistance of R 1. The P(O2) dependence was slightly lower than for 1/R 1 in the cone electrode measurements. However, the temperature at which the P(O2) was changed was different in the symmetrical cell measurements (925 °C) compared to the cone electrode measurements (850 °C). Sintered samples were used in the cone electrode measurements to try to minimize the effect of porosity, whereas porous electrodes were used in the symmetrical cell measurements. The geometric effect could therefore be another cause for the observed difference in the P(O2) dependence. The equivalent capacitance, calculated by C ω=R (1− n ) / n Q 1/ n [44], at the summit frequency of the process at high frequency (R 1 Q 1) was in the same order of magnitude as for a typical double layer capacitance, i.e. ≈10–15 μFcm−2, and was relatively constant with temperature. The high frequency arc (R 1 Q 1) is suggested to relate to some charge transfer resistance and double layer capacitance at the Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ interface. The n-value of Q 1 was between 0.5–0.6. A double layer should theoretically have a n-value of 1. However, since the measurements were performed on porous electrodes there will be many sites where the charge transfer can take place. These distributed transfer sites can be modeled by a simple, one-dimensional transmission line. The n-value should then theoretically be halved and a double layer should therefore have a n-value of 0.5 as was observed in the measurements. R 2 Q 2 presumably reflects the part of the electrode kinetics that is affected by the H 2 partial pressure, such as H 2 adsorption/desorption. R 2 was the dominant feature of the total polarization resistance and it is therefore believed that the limiting performance of this electrode material is due to an apparently low catalytic activity to dissociatively adsorb hydrogen on the surface. It is difficult to assign a process to the Gerischer impedance feature. The fitted parameters (k and Z 0 / D ) were both temperature dependent and dependent on the oxygen partial pressure. The model proposed by Adler [45] for mixed ionic and electronic conductors is probably not applicable to the titanate electrodes since the model breaks down for materials with low ionic conductivity. The model described oxygen transport inside the mixed conductor in competition with the oxygen exchange at its surface [45]. Since the oxygen ions are predominantly conducted in the YSZ phase in the composite electrode investigated here, the Gerischer impedance might reflect surface diffusion of oxide ions in Nb-doped SrTiO3, in combination with oxygen exchange at the surface and/or at the YSZ interfaces. The Gerischer response might also be due to proton diffusion at the surface in combination with hydrogen exchange at the surface, where the hydrogen species are associated with various defects at the surface, similar to the reactions (11) and (12) as discussed for the cone electrode measurements. Surface diffusion of different species, such as oxide ions or protons, might be possible in Nb-doped SrTiO3 since the amount of defects at the surface is expected to be larger than in the bulk. Oxygen vacancies together with Ti3+ are possibly more abundant at the surface than in the bulk. Other authors have modeled their anodes with a Gerischer impedance [42,46]. It was suggested that poor electronic conductivity limited the electrode performance and gave a Gerischer response [42]. Low electronic conductivity should not be a problem in the Nb-doped titanate investigated here. The conductivity of Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3 was reported to be >120 S/cm at 1000 °C in reducing atmosphere (9% H2/N2) and since the material showed a metallic conductivity behavior the conductivity should increase with lower temperature [16]. However, the suggested low percolation of the titanate phase could be responsible. Although the parameters are not fully understood, it is suggested that a similar reaction mechanism model as described for the cone electrode measurements (reactions (11)–(15)) can be applied for the symmetrical cell measurements as well. The absolute values of R P was very high compared to similar measurements on Ni-YSZ composite electrodes. The best reported R P value for a Ni-YSZ anode material, measured with symmetrical cells (with a similar YSZ electrolyte tape) in wet H 2, is approximately 0.11 Ωcm2 at 850 °C [47]. This means that the value reported here for the Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ composite has more than two orders of magnitude lower activity, but the fact that the electrode appears to be stable towards redox cycles is an interesting result. The results presented in Fig. 6 are promising since they showed that between the second and the 19th redox cycle at 850 °C the electrochemical activity did not drastically decrease. R P increased by 12%, and it is not clear if that had to do with the redox tests or due to another electrode degradation mechanism. The increase of R P after the second redox cycle (compared with the initial value) could probably be due to the difference in reduction temperature. The sample was reduced in situ at 980 °C and then the redox cycles were conducted at 850 °C. A similar behavior as shown in the TGA results in Fig. 2 might be expected. The decrease in activity during redox cycling was mainly due to an increase in R 2, which was ascribed to the dissociative adsorption of hydrogen. An increase in R 2 with redox cyclings could therefore indicate a loss of performance due to a change in the amount of exposed surfaces that are catalytically active and/or a lowering of the concentration of defect species. Similar behavior was seen during a single redox cycle. During re-reduction (Fig. 7) it was seen that R 2 increased with time. It could be argued that the surface of the titanate initially will have a higher concentration of defect species, e.g. surface oxygen vacancies. These are created as an outcome of the abrupt change in P(O2). As the time progress, the titanate will come closer to an equilibrium state where the defects will be more homogeneously distributed in the whole titanate structure, including the bulk. This will consequently decrease the concentration of defect species in the surface and thereby increase R 2. The apparently low diffusion rate of Sr-vacancies [29,30] is a probable explanation for the long time needed to reach equilibrium. It is believed that if the microstructure can be improved by improving the percolation of each conductive phase, the polarization resistance can be decreased. However, it appears to be necessary to introduce a more catalytically active material in order to improve the performance. La-doped SrTiO3 with some Mn substituting for Ti [48] and La-doped SrTiO3 with small additions of Mn and Ga on the Ti-site [7] have shown to be promising anode materials for SOFC. It is clear that more work is needed if SrTiO3-based materials are to be realized as SOFC anodes.

Cone Electrode Measurements:
The study of electrode kinetics in a system based on an oxygen ion-conducting electrolyte is often troublesome due to the use of porous electrodes. Porous electrodes add geometrical complications such as current dependent reaction zones and current pathways. The technique of using cone shaped electrodes was initially developed by Fabry, Kleitz and Deportes [32,33] and similar techniques has been used by several other authors [34–37]. The use of cone shaped electrodes appeared to be a useful tool for comparing the relative differences in the electrocatalytic activity between different materials with a minimization of the effect of porosity [17]. Minimizing of the effect of morphology by using dense cone shaped electrodes was attempted to get a better understanding of the mechanisms governing the electrochemical behavior of Nb-doped SrTiO3 as an electrode material in SOFC.
The impedance data was fitted with the same equivalent circuit model as was used for cone electrode measurements of undoped SrTiO3 [17]. The EIS data were fitted to the equivalent circuit R S (Q 1[R 1(RQ)2]), following the circuit description codes used elsewhere [20]. Following the same discussion from undoped SrTiO3 measurements [17], it seems probable that R 1 Q 1 relate to some charge transfer resistance and double layer capacitance at the interface between the electrode and the electrolyte. R 2 Q 2 presumably reflects the part of the electrode kinetics that is affected by the H 2 partial pressure, i.e. the surface reactions involving dissociative adsorption of H 2 and surface diffusion. The various n-values, which are the exponents of the constant phase angle elements (Q), have also been analyzed. For Q 1, the n-value ranged approximately between 0.8–0.9, which suggests that Q 1 has a high degree of capacitive nature. A double layer should theoretically give a n-value of 1, which would be equivalent to a pure flat capacitor. However, the interface between the cone and the electrolyte consist of a rough three-dimensional contact region [17]. The non-ideal contact interface could be one reason for the deviation from unity. For Q 2, the n-value ranged between 0.55–0.7. As this value is near 0.5 the process might reflect surface and/or bulk diffusion limitations. From the P(O2), P(H2), P(H2O), and temperature dependencies of the different fitted resistance parameters, it might be possible to suggest a rough mechanism for the hydrogen oxidation and/or water reduction. When P(H2) and P(H2O) were changed, by keeping the P(H2O)/P(H2) ratio constant (equivalent to a constant P(O2)), only 1/R 2 was affected. 1/R 1 and 1/R S were virtually constant (see Table 1). When P(O2) and P(H2) were changed (at constant P(H2O)), by varying the P(H2O)/P(H2) ratio, both 1/R 1 and 1/R 2 changed while 1/R S was approximately constant. The fact that 1/R 1 was affected by a change in P(O2), approximately P(O2)−1/6 (from Table 1), but not by a change in P(H2) (at constant P(O2) indicates a process that is affected by the defect chemistry in Nb-doped SrTiO3. The process is believed to depend on the formation of oxygen vacancies in the surface region of the Nb-doped SrTiO3 cone electrode. Oxygen vacancies are twofold positively ionized by emitting two electrons into the conduction band: (7) O O x ↔ V O • • + 2 e ′ + 1 / 2 O 2
The mass-action law can be written as: (8) [ V O • • ] n 2 P ( O 2 ) 1 / 2=K V O • • ( T ) where K V O •• (T) represents the temperature dependent formation constant of doubly ionized oxygen vacancies. [OO x ] is assumed to be constant. If it is further assumed that only oxygen vacancies contribute to the variation in the total charge carrier concentration: (9) n ≈ 2 [ V O • • ] the conductivity will only vary with the carrier concentration and its temperature dependent mobility (µn(T)). (10) σ ≈ σ n=e n μ n ( T )
Combining Eqs. (8)–(10) leads to a simplified expression for the conductivity with a P(O2)−1/6 dependence. However, according to the defect chemistry model for Nb-doped SrTiO3 [16,24], the conductivity should have a P(O2)−1/4 dependence in the investigated P(O2) range. It might therefore be speculated that the P(O2)−1/6 dependence of 1/R 1 might be due to a surface mechanism, only incorporating the defect concentrations of oxygen vacancies and Ti3+ close to the surface. It is probable that surface species are reduced more easily than the bulk. This could give a different P(O2) dependence compared to the bulk conductivity model. 1/R 2 was dependent on both P(O2) and P(H2) (both at constant P(H2O) and P(O2)) and had a slightly higher activation energy compared to 1/R 1. From these observations the following reaction model is suggested: (11) H 2 ( g ) + 2 O O(STN) x ↔ 2 O H O(STN) • + 2 e ′ (12) 2 O H O(STN) • + 2 O O(YSZ) x ↔ diffusion surface/bulk 2 O H O(YSZ) • + 2 O O(STN) x (13) 2 O H O(YSZ) • ↔ O O(YSZ) x + H 2 O O(YSZ) • • (14) H 2 O O(YSZ) • • ↔ H 2 O ( g ) + V O(YSZ) • • (15) V O(YSZ) • • + 2 e ′ + 1 / 2 O 2 ( g ) ↔ O O(YSZ) x where the subscript STN denotes species associated with the Nb-doped SrTiO3 surface and the subscript YSZ corresponds to species associated with the YSZ (electrolyte) surface. It is believed that hydrogen adsorption and dissociation preferentially takes place on the surface of the Nb-doped SrTiO3 (STN), where it is associated with surface oxygen in STN (reaction (11)). The conductivity of Nb-doped SrTiO3 has been shown to follow a phonon scattering mechanism (i.e. have a metallic conductivity behavior) [13,16]. This would imply that the electrons formed in reaction (11) will be transferred into the conduction band of the titanate.
An increased amount of Ti3+ will facilitate the conduction of the electrons away from the reaction site. A low P(O2) will increase the surface [Ti3+] which increases the electronic conductivity and thereby decrease the polarization resistance, as was seen in the impedance measurements when P(O2) was decreased and during cathodic polarization. Thus, the electrons formed will be removed relatively fast from the surface and thereby promote the rightward direction of reaction (11). The hydrogen is suggested to diffuse via the oxygen lattice in some surface and/or bulk diffusion to the triple phase boundary and then across the electrode/electrolyte interface (charge transfer resistance — reaction (12)). Reactions (13)–(15) are the suggested subsequent reaction paths occurring at the YSZ surface. It is believed that the major rate limiting step is the adsorption, dissociation, and diffusion of hydrogen species on the STN surface, associated with R 2 Q 2. It appears as if the catalytic activity for oxidizing hydrogen is low in these materials, as has been suggested in the literature as well [12]. The low oxygen ion conductivity, at least in the bulk, is due to the defect chemistry of Nb-doped SrTiO3 [16,24]. This is another factor that limits the performance of these materials. The reactions will therefore probably only occur close to the triple phase boundaries.
The low activity for hydrogen oxidation was visible in the potential sweep in Fig. 4. At anodic overpotentials the evolved current was very low. However, the activity appeared to be much higher in the cathodic direction. In the literature it has been shown that reduced SrTiO3 (100) single crystal surfaces were active for the reduction of H2O and CH3OH. The reaction mechanisms were shown to involve the defect species at the surface of the titanate, namely Ti3+ and oxygen vacancies [38–41]. It is therefore implied that a slightly different mechanism occurs when water is reduced to H2 on the surfaces of Nb-doped SrTiO3 (STN) under cathodic polarization. A possible reaction mechanism could be: (16) 2 Ti Ti x + 2 e ′ ↔ 2 T i ′ Ti (17) H 2 O ( g ) + V O(STN) • • + O O(STN) x ↔ 2 OH O(STN) • (18) 2 OH O(STN) • + 2 T i ′ Ti ↔ H 2 ( g ) + 2 O O(STN) x + 2 Ti Ti x (19) O O(STN) x + V O(YSZ) • • ↔ diffusion surface/bulk O O(YSZ) x + V O(STN) • • (20) O O(YSZ) x ↔ V O(YSZ) • • + 2 e ′ + 1 / 2 O 2 ( g )
Reactions (16)–(20) most probably occurs in several step but similar reaction mechanisms were suggested for the adsorption/desorption experiments on reduced SrTiO3 single crystals [38–41]. The performance at cathodic overpotentials is probably limited by the low oxygen diffusion rate (due to low oxygen vacancy concentration in the bulk) from the Nb-doped SrTiO3 cone electrode to the electrolyte.
The potential sweeps in Fig. 4, especially in the anodic region, were different depending on which direction the sweep started. A tentative explanation for the behavior might be that more Ti3+ and V O(STN) •• close to the cone electrode surface are formed, due to more reducing conditions, when the sweep is started in the cathodic direction. In the subsequent anodic direction the increased concentration of Ti3+ and V O(STN) •• imply a higher electrocatalytic activity resulting in a higher current density.

Conclusions:
Niobium-doped SrTiO3 (nominal composition Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3) has been evaluated as a redox stable anode material for SOFC. The material appears to be chemically compatible (based on XRD) with YSZ since no reaction occurred between the two phases after 12 h sintering at 1250 °C in either air or in 9% H2/N2. By using cone shaped electrodes, the effect of morphology has been minimized, and some mechanisms governing the electrochemical behavior of Nb-doped SrTiO3 as an electrode material in SOFC has been suggested. The concentration of certain defect species (especially Ti3+ and V O ••) close to the electrode surface appeared to have an effect on the electrocatalytic activity of the Nb-doped SrTiO3. Two main rate limiting processes were indicated by the results from the cone shaped electrodes: (i) charge transfer resistance close to the triple phase boundaries and (ii) resistance for dissociative adsorption of hydrogen on the surfaces of the Nb-doped SrTiO3 combined with surface diffusion.
The electrochemical properties, with focus on the redox stability, of Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3 and a composite electrode of Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ were further investigated by using a symmetrical cell configuration. The porous electrodes could be modeled with a Gerischer response in combination with the processes mentioned for the cone electrodes. The addition of a Gerischer impedance points to some extra diffusion related resistance.
The electrode materials showed promising redox stability features and thereby a potential for using the Nb-doped strontium titanates as a part of a SOFC anode appears. However, the temperature at which the material is reduced and then redox cycled is an important parameter when discussing the redox stability of these materials. Finally, Nb-doped SrTiO3 seem to have insufficient catalytic activity for hydrogen oxidation, which needs to be improved if titanate based materials are to be realized as SOFC anodes. Alternatively, titanates may be used as part of a composite anode together with a material that has the necessary catalytic activity.

Body:
Solid oxide fuel cells (SOFC) are high temperature electrochemical devices, which convert the energy of a chemical reaction directly into electrical energy. They are normally operated between 600–1000 °C. Yttria-doped zirconia (YSZ), a polycrystalline ceramic that conducts oxide ions, is used as electrolyte and a nickel-YSZ cermet is the most frequently used anode material in the current state-of-the-art SOFC. The nickel-based fuel electrode can convert simple gases, e.g. hydrogen and CO, without problems. However, nickel tends to agglomerate and sinter, resulting in a degradation of the anode performance with time. The Ni–YSZ anode degrades during redox cycles [1] and impurities in the fuel stream, particularly sulphur [2], inhibit anode functionality.

A new anode must satisfy several important requirements. It should be thermodynamically stable in the anode compartment, electrocatalytically active, and have both electronic and ionic conductivity. The anode must also be chemically inert in contact with the electrolyte and interconnect materials and posses a thermal expansion coefficient similar to that of other SOFC components.

Several authors have suggested that anodes based on a perovskite structure are promising candidates for future fuel cell anodes [3–5]. Recently composites with doped strontium titanates have been reported to show promising electrocatalytic and conductivity results appropriate for SOFC applications [6]. The doped strontium titanate composite anodes were tolerant to oxygen-, carbon, and sulphur-containing atmospheres. Other research groups have reported that titanate-based anodes were remarkably active for the oxidation of CH4 at high temperatures in the absence of excess steam [7]. Some n-doped titanates have also been found to be dimensionally phase stable during redox cyclings [8] and highly tolerant to extremely high sulfur-containing (up to 1% H2S) fuel atmospheres [9]. Thermodynamic calculations and experiments indicated that SrTiO3 was thermodynamically stable in 10% H2S/3% H2O/87% H2. The titanate did not react with the sulfur even after 5 days exposure at 950 °C [10].

The performance of the SrTiO3-based anodes depends on the thermal history and calcination (sintering) atmosphere during the synthesis of the materials [8,11–13]. In this study, a recently developed synthesis route [14] based on the glycine nitrate combustion process (GNP) [15], was used for fabricating submicron sized particles of Nb-doped strontium titanate. The Nb-doped strontium titanate material has been evaluated as part of a potential anode material in terms of electrochemical properties with special focus on redox stability. The defect and electrical transport properties have been investigated in detail elsewhere [16] and will be used as a basis for some of the discussion.

Vacancy-compensated Nb-doped strontium titanate with extra A-site deficiency (nominal composition=Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3) was synthesized by a modified glycine nitrate combustion process (GNP). A detailed description of the synthesis is published elsewhere [14]. The powder ash that formed after the synthesis was calcined in air or in 9% H2/N2 at 800–1100 °C for 2–3 h.

Samples with nominal composition Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3 were pressed into cylinders (first uniaxially dry pressed with 125 MPa followed by isostatically pressed with 325 MPa) for electrochemical characterization using cone shaped electrodes. The pressed samples were subsequently sintered in reducing atmosphere (9% H2/N2) for 12 h at 1400 °C. Reducing atmosphere during sintering was used to try to ensure electronic compensation in the material. The partial pressure of oxygen (P(O2)) during sintering was monitored with an external YSZ oxygen sensor set at 1000 °C. The P(O2) in the furnace at 1400 °C was approximately 10−17 atm. Samples with approximately 95% apparent density (determined by Archimedes principle) were obtained by this process.

The sintered samples were mechanically prepared into cone shaped electrodes. The base of the cones had a diameter of 7.5 mm with the cone mantle making an angle of 45° with the base.

The phase identification of the powders and sintered samples was carried out using an X-ray diffractometer (STOE Theta-Theta diffractometer). X-ray diffractograms were collected at 20°≤2θ ≤90° using Cu Kα radiation (40 kV and 30 mA).

The redox behavior of the powder was investigated with thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) (Netzsch STA 409C/CD) at an isothermal temperature of 850 °C (10 °C/min ramp rate). The samples, which had been calcined in 9% H2 in N2 at 1100 °C for 2 h (P(O2)≈10−18 atm at 1100 °C), were first heated in flowing (50 ml/min) 9% H2 in N2 to 850 °C. When a stable weight value was reached the gas was switched to flowing air (50 ml/min) and the weight increase was used to calculate the concentration of Ti3+ defect species in the titanate. The calculations are based on the defect chemistry model for donor doped strontium titanate, in which the donor compensation mechanism shifts from the cation vacancy to the electronic type when the materials are reduced (see reaction [4] in Section 4.1). The [Ti3+] (mol Ti3+/mol nominal Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3) was calculated as: (1) [ Ti 3 + ]=2 ⋅ m O,TG ⋅ M sample M O ⋅ m sample where m O,TG is the weight increase of the material as it is oxidized (it is assumed that only oxygen is absorbed), M O is the molar weight of oxygen (O), m sample the mass of the sample after water desorption, and M sample is the molar weight of nominal Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3.

The electrochemical properties of Nb-doped SrTiO3 (Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3) was investigated using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and potential sweeps on cone shaped electrodes using the same setup as described elsewhere [17]. Measurements were conducted between 650–1000 °C in various atmospheres with dry or water-saturated H2/N2 gas mixtures. The electrochemical measurements were obtained with a Gamry FAS2 Femtostat (frequency range 60 kHz–50 mHz with 25 mV amplitude).

The electrode polarization resistance of Nb-doped SrTiO3 (Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3) has also been characterized by EIS with a symmetrical cell configuration. A full ceramic composite electrode containing Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3 powder and a commercial YSZ powder (Tosoh, TZ8Y), 1:1 by weight (approximately 54/46 vol.% ratio), has also been investigated. TZ8Y was used to prepare a presintered YSZ electrolyte, ca: 200 μm thick. The electrode material was suspended in a slurry and applied onto both surfaces of the presintered YSZ electrolyte substrate by spraying. The cells were subsequently sintered in air or in reducing atmosphere (9% H2/N2) at 1250 °C for 2–3 h. The thickness of the electrode layers was between 15–30 μm after sintering. Before EIS measurements, Pt-paste was applied onto the electrodes to obtain a current collection layer. For the samples where the electrodes were sintered in a reducing atmosphere the applied current collection layer was also calcined in a reducing atmosphere to avoid oxidation of the electrode. Measurements were conducted between 650–1000 °C in various atmospheres with water-saturated (at ambient temperature) H2/N2 gas mixtures.

The various symmetrical cell samples were also subjected to numerous redox cycles in order to investigate the redox stability of the materials and to simulate the effect of loss of hydrogen fuel during SOFC operation. One redox cycle involved changing the atmosphere from reducing (wet H2) to completely oxidizing (wet air) at 850 °C. The oxidizing atmosphere was maintained for 0.5–2.5 h and then the gas was switched back to wet H2 again. The impedance response was monitored as a function of time from re-reduction as well as a function of the number of redox cycles. The P(O2) was monitored in-situ during the measurements to ensure that the atmosphere was completely changed from reducing to oxidizing and back to reducing again. Three complete redox cycles were performed for the symmetrical cells with Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3 electrodes while 19 cycles were conducted for symmetrical cells with the composite electrode (Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/TZ8Y). The impedance spectra of the electrochemical cells were obtained at open circuit potential (OCP) with a Solartron 1260 FRA (frequency range 1 MHz–50 mHz with 25 mV amplitude).

From the XRD investigation, the Nb-doped SrTiO3 (Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3) showed a cubic perovskite type structure after calcination both in air and in reducing atmosphere (P(O2)≈10−18 atm at 1100 °C), see Fig. 1 .

The isothermal redox behavior of Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3, calcined in reducing atmosphere at 1100 °C for 2 h and redox cycled twice at 850 °C is shown in Fig. 2 . Switching the gas from reducing atmosphere to air had an immediate effect on the P(O2) while in the opposite direction there was a delay before the P(O2) started to drop. This is probably explained by the difference in concentration between H2 (9% H2 in N2) and oxygen (21% O2 in air) in the different reduction and oxidation gases. It was also clear that the sample did not return to the same reduced state (seen as a lower [Ti3+]) after the redox cycles, at least not during the time intervals used in the experiment.

Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy measurements were performed both at open circuit potential (OCP) and under polarization. The impedance spectra results from measurements under OCP and under cathodic polarization is shown in Fig. 3 .

The contact area between the cone and the electrolyte was calculated by using Newman's formula [18]: (2) r=1 4 ⋅ σ ⋅ R S where r is the radius of the contact area, σ is the specific conductivity of the electrolyte material and RS is the resistance determined from the high frequency offset. The procedure for determining the contact area, and some problems associated with this method, is described elsewhere [17]. The specific conductivity of the electrolyte (in S/cm) was extracted from the paper by Appel et. al. [19].

At −300 mV (cathodic) overpotential (η) the polarization resistance was more than one order of magnitude smaller than at OCP while at η=+200 mV (anodic overpotential) the polarization resistance (RP ) was about a factor of two higher than at OCP. The cone measurement results indicate that Nb-doped SrTiO3 has a better performance in cathodic current direction compared to anodic. The spectra in Fig. 3 consisted of at least two overlapping semicircles and the same model was used to fit all spectra measured in the given temperature range and for all the gas compositions. The model used to fit the impedance data is shown in Fig. 3 as well. In this model R S relates to the ohmic drop in the electrolyte. Q 1 and R 1 are presumably related to the double layer capacitance and charge (ion) transfer impedance at the interface between the cone electrode and the electrolyte. Q 2 and R 2 are assumed to be related to the electrochemical kinetics of the electrode material [17]. RP is simply the sum of R 1 and R 2. Measurements at different temperatures and with various gas compositions were performed in order to try to elucidate the different electrochemical and physical processes that are responsible for the impedance response in Fig. 3.

The activation energies (measurements between 650–1000 °C) for the resistive parts in the equivalent circuit model are shown in Table 1 together with the P(O2), P(H2) and P(H2O) dependence at 850 °C. The activation energies were found in the Arrhenius plots by multiplying the constant k in the linear regression shown in Eq. (3) with the gas constant. (3) ln ( 1 / R n )=k ⋅ ( 1 / T ) n=S, 1, or 2. The P(O2), P(H2), and P(H2O) dependence were found by the constant m in the linear regression shown in Eq. (4). (4) log ( 1 / R n )=m ⋅ log ( P ( X ) ) n=S, 1, or 2 and X=H2, O2, or H2O. Eq. (4) is a simple way of empirically evaluating the effect of the partial pressure of various reactant gases. It should be noted that there is no theoretical consideration behind selecting this equation.

The activation energy for 1/R S was the same as reported for similar YSZ materials in the literature [19]. The activation energies of 1/R 1 and 1/R 2 indicate that these parameters are highly dependent on the temperature as well. The P(O2) variation (at constant P(H2O)) was conducted by changing the amount of N2 in the gas stream before the water saturation flask and thereby changing the P(H2)/P(H2O) ratio, and by this the P(O2). The P(H2O) was constant at approximately 0.037 atm while the P(H2) was changed between 0.0089–0.963 atm. The measurements were thus simultaneously performed at three different oxygen partial pressures, P(O2)=1.1·10−20–2.1·10−16 atm (measured with an oxygen sensor). In the constant P(O2) measurements, the P(H2) was varied by changing the amount of dry N2 in the gas stream and only letting H2 pass the water saturation flask, which kept the P(H2)/P(H2O) ratio constant, and hence a constant P(O2). The measurements were performed at three different hydrogen partial pressures, P(H2)=0.0963–0.963 atm. The P(H2O) was consequently simultaneously changed as well between 0.0037–0.037 atm. It is clear from Table 1 that both 1/R 1 and 1/R 2 were affected by a change in P(O2) (at constant P(H2O)) while 1/R S seemed to be virtually independent of the oxygen partial pressure. Only 1/R 2 was affected by the simultaneous change in P(H2) and P(H2O) (at constant P(O2)). 1/R S and 1/R 1 seemed to be rather independent of P(H2) and P(H2O) (at constant P(O2)). The slopes only deviated slightly from zero.

Potential sweeps were also performed on the Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3 cone electrode. The results are shown in Fig. 4 . The features in the Fig. 4 are different depending on which direction the measurements started (cathodic or anodic current direction first).

The material seems to perform better in cathodic current direction than in anodic current direction. A steep slope in Fig. 4, at a certain overpotential, indicate better performance. Similar results were shown in Fig. 3, where the polarization resistance was lower in cathodic current direction (splitting of water, electrolysis mode) than in anodic current direction (oxidation of hydrogen, fuel cell mode).

Some impedance spectra from symmetrical cell measurements on porous electrodes at 850 °C in hydrogen humidified with water (97% H2/3% H2O) are shown in Fig. 5 .

All spectra have been fitted with the same equivalent circuit containing a Gerischer impedance element, LRS(Q 1 R 1)G(Q 2 R 2). The circuit description code used here is described elsewhere [20]. The Gerischer impedance can be represented by a quite simple impedance relation [21]: (5) Z ( ω )=Z 0 D ⋅ ( k + j ω ) where k represents a reaction rate and D is a diffusion constant. It is clear from Fig. 5 that the composite with Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ (S94TNb10/YSZ) had an initial performance that was one order of magnitude better than the sample without YSZ. This indicates that the titanate has a very low ionic conductivity (σe >> σi ) and that YSZ improves the electrode performance by providing conduction of oxygen ions.

The results from the redox cycles of the composite sample (Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ) are shown in Fig. 6 . Each measuring point was taken 13 h after the gas was switched back to wet H2 again.

The polarization resistance increased from the initial value of 16.3 Ωcm2 to 29 Ωcm2 after two redox cycles, but from the second to the 19th redox cycle RP only increased by 12%. How the different parameters evolved over time after re-reduction during a redox cycle is shown in Fig. 7 where the sixth redox cycle is presented in more detail. R S and R 1 decreased slightly with time during the first seven hours, while R 2 and R G increased with time and were stable after 13 h. Similar behavior was seen for all redox cycles.

The main components of RP appeared to be R 2 and R G (the real part of the Gerischer impedance when ω →0, RG=Z 0 / D · k), while R 1 appeared to be small (between 0.34–0.37 Ωcm2, see Fig. 6) and relatively constant with redox cycles. R S increased from an initial value of 0.47 Ωcm2 to 0.56 Ωcm2 after the 19th redox cycle (Fig. 6). However, R S and R1 decreased with time during re-reduction (see single redox cycle in Fig. 7). For the single component electrode symmetrical cells with Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3 (S94TNb10) the polarization resistance (R P ) decreased from an initial value of 163 Ωcm2 to 96 Ωcm2 after the third redox cycle. Samples that had been fabricated in air were reduced in-situ in wet H2 at 980 °C. The redox cycles were then performed at 850 °C.

After the redox experiments, a more detailed analysis was performed for the symmetrical cells having the composite material (Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ) as the electrodes. The activation energies (measurements at four temperatures between 750–925 °C) for the different parts in the equivalent circuit model are shown in Table 2 together with the P(O2) and P(H2) dependence at 925 °C (at constant P(H2O)). The activation energies and the P(O2) and P(H2) dependence were extracted similarly as in the cone measurements previously explained (see Eqs. (3) and (4)).

The activation energies indicate that all parameters are highly temperature dependent. The variation in P(O2) was conducted at 850 °C by changing the amount of N2 in the gas before the water saturation flask and thereby changing the P(H2)/P(H2O) ratio. The P(H2O) was constant at approximately 0.03 atm while the P(H2) was changed between 0.0087–0.97 atm. The measurements were thus simultaneously performed at four different P(O2) between 7.5·10−20–5.6·10−17 atm. All the fitted parameters showed more or less dependency on the oxygen partial pressure and/or hydrogen partial pressure. RS, which is usually assumed to be the ohmic resistance from the electrolyte, also seemed to be affected by the simultaneous change in P(O2) and P(H2). All parameters except one were negatively affected by an increase in P(O2), meaning that an increase in P(O2) (or decrease of P(H2)) lead to an increase in the various resistances and a decrease in the rate constant. The only parameter that was positively affected was the Z 0 / D term (i.e. higher value when P(O2) increased or P(H2) decreased). However, the diffusion constant is the important parameter and it can be argued that since the diffusion term is in the denominator, it will also be negatively affected by an increase in P(O2) (or decrease of P(H2)), i.e. lower D when P(O2) increased (or P(H2) decreased).

Strontium (e.g. in LSM cathodes with high strontium content) is known to react with YSZ at elevated temperatures to form secondary phases at the interface between the cathode and the electrolyte [22,23]. The possible formation of new phases such as SrZrO3 at the interface with less favorable properties will have a negative impact on the cell performance. In order to minimize the possibility for excess strontium to exsolve from the perovskite and react with the electrolyte the nominal A:B-ratio was kept below 0.95, which is the theoretical A:B-ratio for the vacancy compensated material with 10 at.% Nb. A discussion about the defect chemistry of Nb-doped SrTiO3 with various Nb-doping and Sr/Ti-ratio is given elsewhere [16].

In this study the Nb-doped SrTiO3 samples were formulated assuming Sr-vacancy compensation of the donors. According to the commonly accepted defect chemistry model for donor-doped SrTiO3, the donor compensation mechanism shifts from the cation vacancy to the electronic type when the compound is exposed to low P(O2) during sintering [16,24]: (6) y V ″ Sr + y Ti Ti + 3 y O O ↔ y / 2 O 2 + 2 y e ′ + y TiO 2

The results from TGA agree with the defect chemistry model described by Moos [24]. According to the model there should not be any oxygen substoichiometry in the materials, at least not in the investigated temperature and P(O2) range. Oxygen vacancies will not be formed until all Nb-atoms have been electronically compensated by Ti3+. The oxygen stoichiometry from TGA was used to calculate the amount of Ti3+ (2 ye' in reaction (6)) in the sample, which was in agreement with the defect chemistry model [16,24]. However, the material did not return to the same initial reduced state after the redox cycles (see Fig. 2). That was probably due to that the samples were calcined in reducing atmosphere at 1100 °C while the redox tests were performed at a lower temperature of 850 °C. The temperature at which the sample is reduced is thus an important parameter when discussing the redox stability of these materials. The TGA results (Fig. 2) also indicated that the rate for oxidation was faster than the rate for reduction. One possible explanation could be that the change in strontium vacancy concentration plays a major role to this effect by increasing the rate of equilibration of the strontium ion lattice as the material is oxidized [25–27] (c.f. reaction (6)). It has been proposed in the literature that the equilibration mechanisms of n-doped SrTiO3 depend on the diffusion of Sr via Sr vacancies [25–30]. The Sr and Sr-vacancy diffusion coefficients are extremely low for n-doped titanates, in the order of 10−16 cm2s−1 at temperatures above 1300 °C [26,27]. During reduction strontium vacancies are consumed (rightward direction of reaction (6)) which immediately slows down the diffusion of strontium ions in the surface region, hence the slower rate for reduction compared to oxidation.

Chemical compatibility of the Nb-doped titanates with YSZ was tested by intimately mixing 1:1 (by weight) mixtures of pre-calcined YSZ and Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3. The powder mixtures were pressed into pellets and fired in air or in reducing atmosphere (9% H2 in N2) at 1250 °C for 12 h. The following XRD investigation indicated no reaction under any of these conditions. However, it is not possible from these experiments to be certain that no reaction would occur upon prolonged heating or during numerous redox cycles. The possible formation of new phases such as SrZrO3, or Ti-dissolution in the YSZ, at the interface with less favorable properties [31] would have a negative impact on the cell performance and must be avoided.

The study of electrode kinetics in a system based on an oxygen ion-conducting electrolyte is often troublesome due to the use of porous electrodes. Porous electrodes add geometrical complications such as current dependent reaction zones and current pathways. The technique of using cone shaped electrodes was initially developed by Fabry, Kleitz and Deportes [32,33] and similar techniques has been used by several other authors [34–37]. The use of cone shaped electrodes appeared to be a useful tool for comparing the relative differences in the electrocatalytic activity between different materials with a minimization of the effect of porosity [17]. Minimizing of the effect of morphology by using dense cone shaped electrodes was attempted to get a better understanding of the mechanisms governing the electrochemical behavior of Nb-doped SrTiO3 as an electrode material in SOFC.

The impedance data was fitted with the same equivalent circuit model as was used for cone electrode measurements of undoped SrTiO3 [17]. The EIS data were fitted to the equivalent circuit R S (Q 1[R 1(RQ)2]), following the circuit description codes used elsewhere [20]. Following the same discussion from undoped SrTiO3 measurements [17], it seems probable that R 1 Q 1 relate to some charge transfer resistance and double layer capacitance at the interface between the electrode and the electrolyte. R 2 Q 2 presumably reflects the part of the electrode kinetics that is affected by the H 2 partial pressure, i.e. the surface reactions involving dissociative adsorption of H 2 and surface diffusion. The various n-values, which are the exponents of the constant phase angle elements (Q), have also been analyzed. For Q 1, the n-value ranged approximately between 0.8–0.9, which suggests that Q 1 has a high degree of capacitive nature. A double layer should theoretically give a n-value of 1, which would be equivalent to a pure flat capacitor. However, the interface between the cone and the electrolyte consist of a rough three-dimensional contact region [17]. The non-ideal contact interface could be one reason for the deviation from unity. For Q 2, the n-value ranged between 0.55–0.7. As this value is near 0.5 the process might reflect surface and/or bulk diffusion limitations. From the P(O2), P(H2), P(H2O), and temperature dependencies of the different fitted resistance parameters, it might be possible to suggest a rough mechanism for the hydrogen oxidation and/or water reduction. When P(H2) and P(H2O) were changed, by keeping the P(H2O)/P(H2) ratio constant (equivalent to a constant P(O2)), only 1/R 2 was affected. 1/R 1 and 1/R S were virtually constant (see Table 1). When P(O2) and P(H2) were changed (at constant P(H2O)), by varying the P(H2O)/P(H2) ratio, both 1/R 1 and 1/R 2 changed while 1/R S was approximately constant. The fact that 1/R 1 was affected by a change in P(O2), approximately P(O2)−1/6 (from Table 1), but not by a change in P(H2) (at constant P(O2) indicates a process that is affected by the defect chemistry in Nb-doped SrTiO3. The process is believed to depend on the formation of oxygen vacancies in the surface region of the Nb-doped SrTiO3 cone electrode. Oxygen vacancies are twofold positively ionized by emitting two electrons into the conduction band: (7) O O x ↔ V O • • + 2 e ′ + 1 / 2 O 2

The mass-action law can be written as: (8) [ V O • • ] n 2 P ( O 2 ) 1 / 2=K V O • • ( T ) where K V O •• (T) represents the temperature dependent formation constant of doubly ionized oxygen vacancies. [OO x ] is assumed to be constant. If it is further assumed that only oxygen vacancies contribute to the variation in the total charge carrier concentration: (9) n ≈ 2 [ V O • • ] the conductivity will only vary with the carrier concentration and its temperature dependent mobility (µn(T)). (10) σ ≈ σ n=e n μ n ( T )

Combining Eqs. (8)–(10) leads to a simplified expression for the conductivity with a P(O2)−1/6 dependence. However, according to the defect chemistry model for Nb-doped SrTiO3 [16,24], the conductivity should have a P(O2)−1/4 dependence in the investigated P(O2) range. It might therefore be speculated that the P(O2)−1/6 dependence of 1/R 1 might be due to a surface mechanism, only incorporating the defect concentrations of oxygen vacancies and Ti3+ close to the surface. It is probable that surface species are reduced more easily than the bulk. This could give a different P(O2) dependence compared to the bulk conductivity model. 1/R 2 was dependent on both P(O2) and P(H2) (both at constant P(H2O) and P(O2)) and had a slightly higher activation energy compared to 1/R 1. From these observations the following reaction model is suggested: (11) H 2 ( g ) + 2 O O(STN) x ↔ 2 O H O(STN) • + 2 e ′ (12) 2 O H O(STN) • + 2 O O(YSZ) x ↔ diffusion surface/bulk 2 O H O(YSZ) • + 2 O O(STN) x (13) 2 O H O(YSZ) • ↔ O O(YSZ) x + H 2 O O(YSZ) • • (14) H 2 O O(YSZ) • • ↔ H 2 O ( g ) + V O(YSZ) • • (15) V O(YSZ) • • + 2 e ′ + 1 / 2 O 2 ( g ) ↔ O O(YSZ) x where the subscript STN denotes species associated with the Nb-doped SrTiO3 surface and the subscript YSZ corresponds to species associated with the YSZ (electrolyte) surface. It is believed that hydrogen adsorption and dissociation preferentially takes place on the surface of the Nb-doped SrTiO3 (STN), where it is associated with surface oxygen in STN (reaction (11)). The conductivity of Nb-doped SrTiO3 has been shown to follow a phonon scattering mechanism (i.e. have a metallic conductivity behavior) [13,16]. This would imply that the electrons formed in reaction (11) will be transferred into the conduction band of the titanate.

An increased amount of Ti3+ will facilitate the conduction of the electrons away from the reaction site. A low P(O2) will increase the surface [Ti3+] which increases the electronic conductivity and thereby decrease the polarization resistance, as was seen in the impedance measurements when P(O2) was decreased and during cathodic polarization. Thus, the electrons formed will be removed relatively fast from the surface and thereby promote the rightward direction of reaction (11). The hydrogen is suggested to diffuse via the oxygen lattice in some surface and/or bulk diffusion to the triple phase boundary and then across the electrode/electrolyte interface (charge transfer resistance — reaction (12)). Reactions (13)–(15) are the suggested subsequent reaction paths occurring at the YSZ surface. It is believed that the major rate limiting step is the adsorption, dissociation, and diffusion of hydrogen species on the STN surface, associated with R 2 Q 2. It appears as if the catalytic activity for oxidizing hydrogen is low in these materials, as has been suggested in the literature as well [12]. The low oxygen ion conductivity, at least in the bulk, is due to the defect chemistry of Nb-doped SrTiO3 [16,24]. This is another factor that limits the performance of these materials. The reactions will therefore probably only occur close to the triple phase boundaries.

The low activity for hydrogen oxidation was visible in the potential sweep in Fig. 4. At anodic overpotentials the evolved current was very low. However, the activity appeared to be much higher in the cathodic direction. In the literature it has been shown that reduced SrTiO3 (100) single crystal surfaces were active for the reduction of H2O and CH3OH. The reaction mechanisms were shown to involve the defect species at the surface of the titanate, namely Ti3+ and oxygen vacancies [38–41]. It is therefore implied that a slightly different mechanism occurs when water is reduced to H2 on the surfaces of Nb-doped SrTiO3 (STN) under cathodic polarization. A possible reaction mechanism could be: (16) 2 Ti Ti x + 2 e ′ ↔ 2 T i ′ Ti (17) H 2 O ( g ) + V O(STN) • • + O O(STN) x ↔ 2 OH O(STN) • (18) 2 OH O(STN) • + 2 T i ′ Ti ↔ H 2 ( g ) + 2 O O(STN) x + 2 Ti Ti x (19) O O(STN) x + V O(YSZ) • • ↔ diffusion surface/bulk O O(YSZ) x + V O(STN) • • (20) O O(YSZ) x ↔ V O(YSZ) • • + 2 e ′ + 1 / 2 O 2 ( g )

Reactions (16)–(20) most probably occurs in several step but similar reaction mechanisms were suggested for the adsorption/desorption experiments on reduced SrTiO3 single crystals [38–41]. The performance at cathodic overpotentials is probably limited by the low oxygen diffusion rate (due to low oxygen vacancy concentration in the bulk) from the Nb-doped SrTiO3 cone electrode to the electrolyte.

The potential sweeps in Fig. 4, especially in the anodic region, were different depending on which direction the sweep started. A tentative explanation for the behavior might be that more Ti3+ and V O(STN) •• close to the cone electrode surface are formed, due to more reducing conditions, when the sweep is started in the cathodic direction. In the subsequent anodic direction the increased concentration of Ti3+ and V O(STN) •• imply a higher electrocatalytic activity resulting in a higher current density.

The impedance of all symmetrical cell measurements could be fitted with a Gerischer impedance in combination with two RQ-circuits, an inductance (from the wires in the set-up), and an ohmic resistance. It can be shown that the Gerischer expression for non-aqueous systems can be derived by adding a side reaction in Fick's second law that affects the concentration [21]: (21) d c ( x , t ) d t=D ˜ d 2 c ( x , t ) d x 2 − k ⋅ c ( x , t ) c(x,t) is the excess concentration above the equilibrium concentration and k is the reaction rate of the side reaction. For semi-infinite diffusion with a side reaction the impedance solution from solving Fick's first and second laws will be equivalent with Eq. (21).

From the P(O2), and temperature dependence of the different fitted parameters, it might be possible to suggest a similar mechanism for the hydrogen oxidation and/or water reduction as already discussed for the cone electrode measurements.

It was quite unexpected that 1/R S varied with the P(O2) and not only with the temperature (see Table 2). However, similar behavior has been observed for thin layered chromite-titanate porous electrodes. For thin electrode layers (10–20 μm) the lateral electrode resistance added a significant contribution to the overall electrode impedance [42]. The effect of P(O2) on the ohmic resistance was ascribed to a limitation in the electronic conductivity in the thin film electrodes. A probable explanation, for the observed P(O2) dependence in the results presented here, could be a too low percolation of the electronically conductive phase in the Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ composite electrode. It might be argued that the Pt/(Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ) interface (at the Pt current collector) might be important for the size of the polarization resistance of the composite electrode as Pt is not an inert material. However, if that was the case, the polarization resistance would be expected to be much higher. Sholklapper et al [43] showed that the polarization resistance of a SOFC with a Pt — porous YSZ cathode was 110 Ωcm2, i.e. over 30 times higher than a similar SOFC with LSM infiltrated YSZ electrode (2.9 Ωcm2). Also the ohmic resistance (R S ) was more than 10 times higher for the cell with the non-infiltrated YSZ cathode [43]. The results presented here showed that R S of the single component Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3-electrode and the Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ composite electrode were similar. Combing these results with the much smaller polarization resistance of the composite electrode, indicates that it is the Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ interfaces in the composite electrode that provides the active reaction sites for the electrochemical reactions and not the Pt/(Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ) interfaces close to the current collector.

1/R 1 changed both with temperature and P(O2) (Table 2) and it is believed to be related to the defect chemistry/surface diffusion rate of oxide vacancies on the surface of the titanate or the transfer resistance of oxide vacancies from STN to YSZ, similar to what was discussed for the cone electrode measurements. The fact that R 1 decreased with time during re-reduction (see Fig. 7) suggests that as the sample was reduced, the concentration of Ti3+ and V O •• (at the surface) in the titanate increased which consequently lowered the resistance of R 1. The P(O2) dependence was slightly lower than for 1/R 1 in the cone electrode measurements. However, the temperature at which the P(O2) was changed was different in the symmetrical cell measurements (925 °C) compared to the cone electrode measurements (850 °C). Sintered samples were used in the cone electrode measurements to try to minimize the effect of porosity, whereas porous electrodes were used in the symmetrical cell measurements. The geometric effect could therefore be another cause for the observed difference in the P(O2) dependence. The equivalent capacitance, calculated by C ω=R (1− n ) / n Q 1/ n [44], at the summit frequency of the process at high frequency (R 1 Q 1) was in the same order of magnitude as for a typical double layer capacitance, i.e. ≈10–15 μFcm−2, and was relatively constant with temperature. The high frequency arc (R 1 Q 1) is suggested to relate to some charge transfer resistance and double layer capacitance at the Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ interface. The n-value of Q 1 was between 0.5–0.6. A double layer should theoretically have a n-value of 1. However, since the measurements were performed on porous electrodes there will be many sites where the charge transfer can take place. These distributed transfer sites can be modeled by a simple, one-dimensional transmission line. The n-value should then theoretically be halved and a double layer should therefore have a n-value of 0.5 as was observed in the measurements.

R 2 Q 2 presumably reflects the part of the electrode kinetics that is affected by the H 2 partial pressure, such as H 2 adsorption/desorption. R 2 was the dominant feature of the total polarization resistance and it is therefore believed that the limiting performance of this electrode material is due to an apparently low catalytic activity to dissociatively adsorb hydrogen on the surface. It is difficult to assign a process to the Gerischer impedance feature. The fitted parameters (k and Z 0 / D ) were both temperature dependent and dependent on the oxygen partial pressure. The model proposed by Adler [45] for mixed ionic and electronic conductors is probably not applicable to the titanate electrodes since the model breaks down for materials with low ionic conductivity. The model described oxygen transport inside the mixed conductor in competition with the oxygen exchange at its surface [45]. Since the oxygen ions are predominantly conducted in the YSZ phase in the composite electrode investigated here, the Gerischer impedance might reflect surface diffusion of oxide ions in Nb-doped SrTiO3, in combination with oxygen exchange at the surface and/or at the YSZ interfaces. The Gerischer response might also be due to proton diffusion at the surface in combination with hydrogen exchange at the surface, where the hydrogen species are associated with various defects at the surface, similar to the reactions (11) and (12) as discussed for the cone electrode measurements. Surface diffusion of different species, such as oxide ions or protons, might be possible in Nb-doped SrTiO3 since the amount of defects at the surface is expected to be larger than in the bulk. Oxygen vacancies together with Ti3+ are possibly more abundant at the surface than in the bulk.

Other authors have modeled their anodes with a Gerischer impedance [42,46]. It was suggested that poor electronic conductivity limited the electrode performance and gave a Gerischer response [42]. Low electronic conductivity should not be a problem in the Nb-doped titanate investigated here. The conductivity of Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3 was reported to be >120 S/cm at 1000 °C in reducing atmosphere (9% H2/N2) and since the material showed a metallic conductivity behavior the conductivity should increase with lower temperature [16]. However, the suggested low percolation of the titanate phase could be responsible. Although the parameters are not fully understood, it is suggested that a similar reaction mechanism model as described for the cone electrode measurements (reactions (11)–(15)) can be applied for the symmetrical cell measurements as well.

The absolute values of R P was very high compared to similar measurements on Ni-YSZ composite electrodes. The best reported R P value for a Ni-YSZ anode material, measured with symmetrical cells (with a similar YSZ electrolyte tape) in wet H 2, is approximately 0.11 Ωcm2 at 850 °C [47]. This means that the value reported here for the Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ composite has more than two orders of magnitude lower activity, but the fact that the electrode appears to be stable towards redox cycles is an interesting result. The results presented in Fig. 6 are promising since they showed that between the second and the 19th redox cycle at 850 °C the electrochemical activity did not drastically decrease. R P increased by 12%, and it is not clear if that had to do with the redox tests or due to another electrode degradation mechanism. The increase of R P after the second redox cycle (compared with the initial value) could probably be due to the difference in reduction temperature. The sample was reduced in situ at 980 °C and then the redox cycles were conducted at 850 °C. A similar behavior as shown in the TGA results in Fig. 2 might be expected. The decrease in activity during redox cycling was mainly due to an increase in R 2, which was ascribed to the dissociative adsorption of hydrogen. An increase in R 2 with redox cyclings could therefore indicate a loss of performance due to a change in the amount of exposed surfaces that are catalytically active and/or a lowering of the concentration of defect species. Similar behavior was seen during a single redox cycle. During re-reduction (Fig. 7) it was seen that R 2 increased with time. It could be argued that the surface of the titanate initially will have a higher concentration of defect species, e.g. surface oxygen vacancies. These are created as an outcome of the abrupt change in P(O2). As the time progress, the titanate will come closer to an equilibrium state where the defects will be more homogeneously distributed in the whole titanate structure, including the bulk. This will consequently decrease the concentration of defect species in the surface and thereby increase R 2. The apparently low diffusion rate of Sr-vacancies [29,30] is a probable explanation for the long time needed to reach equilibrium. It is believed that if the microstructure can be improved by improving the percolation of each conductive phase, the polarization resistance can be decreased. However, it appears to be necessary to introduce a more catalytically active material in order to improve the performance. La-doped SrTiO3 with some Mn substituting for Ti [48] and La-doped SrTiO3 with small additions of Mn and Ga on the Ti-site [7] have shown to be promising anode materials for SOFC. It is clear that more work is needed if SrTiO3-based materials are to be realized as SOFC anodes.

Niobium-doped SrTiO3 (nominal composition Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3) has been evaluated as a redox stable anode material for SOFC. The material appears to be chemically compatible (based on XRD) with YSZ since no reaction occurred between the two phases after 12 h sintering at 1250 °C in either air or in 9% H2/N2. By using cone shaped electrodes, the effect of morphology has been minimized, and some mechanisms governing the electrochemical behavior of Nb-doped SrTiO3 as an electrode material in SOFC has been suggested. The concentration of certain defect species (especially Ti3+ and V O ••) close to the electrode surface appeared to have an effect on the electrocatalytic activity of the Nb-doped SrTiO3. Two main rate limiting processes were indicated by the results from the cone shaped electrodes: (i) charge transfer resistance close to the triple phase boundaries and (ii) resistance for dissociative adsorption of hydrogen on the surfaces of the Nb-doped SrTiO3 combined with surface diffusion.

The electrochemical properties, with focus on the redox stability, of Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3 and a composite electrode of Sr0.94Ti0.9Nb0.1O3/YSZ were further investigated by using a symmetrical cell configuration. The porous electrodes could be modeled with a Gerischer response in combination with the processes mentioned for the cone electrodes. The addition of a Gerischer impedance points to some extra diffusion related resistance.

The electrode materials showed promising redox stability features and thereby a potential for using the Nb-doped strontium titanates as a part of a SOFC anode appears. However, the temperature at which the material is reduced and then redox cycled is an important parameter when discussing the redox stability of these materials. Finally, Nb-doped SrTiO3 seem to have insufficient catalytic activity for hydrogen oxidation, which needs to be improved if titanate based materials are to be realized as SOFC anodes. Alternatively, titanates may be used as part of a composite anode together with a material that has the necessary catalytic activity.

The authors would like to acknowledge financial support of the European Union IP-project Real-SOFC (SES6-CT-2003-502612). We are grateful to the Fuel Cells and Solid State Chemistry Department at Risø for assistance.